= os =

k

kà, tense marker to denote past tense (remcte)
m̌’ mùn kà bo̤ ma v(ṅgoòṅ a certain man was in the
town.

kà, v. put or strike fire;
i kà mu’ mè tcsa̤̯d hae strikes fire with one stroke;
; § wad

kǎ, vocative particle; (never at the beginning of a sentence) ;
ndzo̤ kù u, kǎ ba take care of your leg, father;
bim ntsu à, kǎ nǎ believe my word, o woman;
pàd mon, kǎ Paulo carty the child on your back, Paul.

kǎ, n. pl. bàkǎ grandmother; k ma̍ ny gr.,; kǎ ù your gr..

kǎ, v. grind roughly ; § kaci
kǎ, v. draw line, mark
ka, v. remind, urge, force, call to account

ka, v. aux. (always followed by ni) still on the way, about to, just
(expressing duration) ;
màndzi o le ka ni nda teohis road is still used;
fd a bo̤ ka ni nto I ma Benin my brother had just
come from Benin;
bo bi ka ni ntsu bub, mǎ’ mùn to while they were still
talking, another man came ;
ṅ ka ni ntse tsǎ I am just arriving.

ka fà’, v. uproot grass (which will be burned) usually with a hoe
kab, n. small crayfish

kab, v. cup hand (to drink water)
The chief used to share his drink, pouring from his cup
into the cupped hands of his children; § kabt;

kab, v. pick fruits, take off;
bo ni ṅkab coffee they pick coffee.

kab, v. wave hither, with the hand, moving fingers
downward; § fuṅti, ṅd’ti

kǎb, v. be dark, be dusky; nadza̤ m kǎb mi’ mi darkness
makes his eyes dark, it is getting dark;

 

 

-tog:-
mi’ mi kàb ndza̤m his eyes become dark.
kàbtì, v. ( cover, become dark;
mi’ mi kàbti; nsa̤n ṅkańin his eyes are covered,
become dark, he cannot see. § kàǎb
kàd, n. hut, booth for a secret society; bo tsi, ni nno ma kàd
they are sitting and drinking in the booth; i ma kàd

ṅgùmba he is in the ṅgumba-hut.

kad, n. pad, used for carrying pots and other things on the
head; mà bo kad wind aa nad.

kad, v. travel, walk; visit;
bi to, ni ṅkad a come and visit me;
mà kad mvi teravel about; § kani, ṅkad
kǎdmbi, n. sheepfold or goat-pen in the compound
kàdù, n. also: kǎmdù beehive
kàkàntsàṅ, n. kind of thorny shrub whose red fruits are edible

kalàm, n. cacross, cinders; § tsi làm

kalaṅ, n. (a-ma) waste, sediment; kalaṅ ’mbàṅ, waste
matter of palmnuts

kalaṅmùn, n. also: kala’ mùn tall, fat, strong man
kalaṅndab, n. biggest, gigantic house
kalaṅtṳ, n. mightiest tree

kali, n. wheel; bon ni mma’ kali tone children play with
a wheel.

kalikalì , adj. rough, bumpy

kaàm;, v: eat something with crayfish; § kamti
kǎm, v. lack, miss; à km franks iba two franc are missing.
kǎm, v. divide, form part of the fufu dough to knead;

kǎm (̇g̤̍ṅ rough fufu.

kǎm, v. bark, peel, pare, scrape, skin;
i kǎm ya’ tṳ̯ he strips the bark of the tree; § dzeb

 

-
kam, n. crab, shellfish; § kǒ̤am, yad
kam, v. chew (used feor baby)

kam, à bi, ù dzi m? (Pr.) think before you act;
chew properly, before you swallow; § ṅkamtikamti

kambàn, n. tree sp. (found in the steppe, fire resistant); the bark
yields a good medicine against itching and rashes;
bo kǎm yà’ bi, nnaṅ, nsǐ̌ ’ mban they take off
the bark, boil it and wash the itching spot with it.
kǎmbod, n. pl. bàkǎmbod great- aunt, younger sister of grandmother
kǎmdù, n. honeycomb; § kàdù
kàmel, n. pl. bà kàmel camel
kǎmṅkùndòṅ, n. a hand of banana or plantain
kàmti, v. scratch, scrape off;
mban dzɑ’ mon (e, i ni ṅkamti ni; tn the rash
is itching the child; it scratches a lot ; § fǎṅ, kam
kamti, v. also: kam eat s.th. with crayfish; chew

kamtis, v. kamti ntsù enjoy s.th., enjoy eating; § tsǎo ntsù

kamti bo, v. make a fist, not including the thumb; i kamcti yum ni bo
he hides s.th. in his hand; § kob(i, kobti, ṅati

kamṳ̯̀, v. make an effort, pull o.s. together ;
i kam yi be pulled himself together.

kamù̯, v. rot; § v̤

kamu, v. consider, think about = maà bati nù mind about, care;
kam ̇gṳ̌n ò, i to a, mfa yum, i dzṳ̯ be considerate
of this stranger who comes, give him s. th. to eat;
i kamu̯ na be cares for me;
i mà ni (̇kamu bi mùn bo̤ be coes not care about
anything; he does not mind; § f̤̌ mboùm

kamq, v. be pretentious, not being satisfied

kàmù̯ndà, n. commander

kàn, n. covenant, commandmen; bo wàd kàn they made an alliance

 

 

kan,

:

kan, v.

kǎn, v.

kàndzoli, n.

kani,

kàṅ,

kan,

v.

ṅkàṅ

ṅ sun, v.

-f --

i tso kàn mfòn he broke the commandment of

the chief;

mà fa kàn or: mà dzṳ̯ kàn be ceconciled with s.o.

after having been divorced. Procedure: some water is
poured on the ground, some paste is stirred and placed
in the mouth of the opponent, the one to be reconciled;
he spits it out and is given more of it; he then swallows
it and the reconciliation has been accomplished.

be tired, become tired

take s.th. seriously, take to heart ;
i kan nù ti hae takes the matter to heart, is much
affected by it.

forbid, fix lawfully, order;

mfòn kà kǎn ndikàṅ vu the chief forbade shooting

at funerals;

mfòn kà kàǎn ṅgâ, mùn ma (ṅǩ’ ṅkǒ̤ì vu bo̤ ttke chief
forbade mourning in future or ordered that henceforth
there should no longer be any mourning upon the death of
s.o.; mfòn kǎn mà meè’ti ndab le mbò bo tere chief refused
permission to finish the house; § ;

trap to catch a rodent (nadz̤ bo)
also: kadnì walk about, promenade; § kad, adzid

a line;

à ti kòd kàn i bo it does not touch its line;

fa mǒ̌’ karṅ su give another sentence ;

bonṅkàṅ small lines ; ṅkǎṅṅwà’ ni lines of writing;
i ni ndzid ni ṅkàṅ he is marching in a line.

asthma; heavy breathing;
ù yo, i ni ṅko’ni m, mbi’ kǎṅ ndɑ̌ i you see he is
breathing heavily because of asthma; § ko ni

make friends

plate, bowl; § kaṅńama, mokarṅ̇, kobtikan;
i l̯ṅti kaṅ heis licking the plate and cleaning out
the rest with his fingers.

roast, bake; fig. press s.o. heavily;

ù fuṅ yṳ̯’ kaṅ yṳ̯ ’ kaṅ e?’ co you call us in order

to roast us (because you have called us to do some
work, when there is nothing to eat); bo kaṙ mbùm (gob,
ni ṅkwa̤d they bake eggs and eat them; § i̇kâṅkaṅ

 

=

kaṅ, onom. also: koṅ good sound, very good;
mbarṅ mboṅka̤d tsu mè kan, kaṅ, kaṅ a well burned
pot has a good sound ;
yum le tu̯n mè kâṅ tone thing is very hard .

kǎṅbùn, n. also: ṅkǎṅbùn, kǎṅmbùn rodent sp., gnawer; it is the
size of a squirrel with a bushy, dark grey tail.

kàṅmàndzì, n. trodden path
kàṅnì, n. bird with red beak

kàṅni, v. strain, filter, hark, take s.th. out of liquid ;
mà kàṅni kèm bi to sterain the sediments.

kaṅni, n. sieve, funnel

kaṅni, v. inaugurate, employ, use ;
nǎ kaṅni mbàṅ mfi the mother uses a new pot;
mà karṅni ndâ muytin mfi inaugurate a new meeting
house, hall or church;
bo kaṅni ntǎṅ mon they brush the throat of the
new-born with a hen-feather, using a mixture of
pepper, oil and salt, so that the child retches and

brings forth mucus.

kaṅni, v. search around, look searchingly;
i kaṅni lṳ’ ni mi’ mi he looks around the place
carefully with his eyes; i kaṅni mi ni nta’ màùn
he is looking around for somebody.

kàṅnindù’, n. fibres of the oilpalm used to strain palmwine

kàṅnsà’, n. midday (about one or two o’clock) ; à bo̤ n; kàṅnsà’
it is at midday.

kàṅntsì, n. river-bed

kaṅṅgob , n. hen house, cage for chicken

kaṅṅgùm, n. brace at each side of the roof to keep it firm
n. metal vessel; § ńama

kàṅṳ̯, v. snatch up, gather up; claim;

mà kàṅṳ̯ yum take advantage of someone in a dispute
(claim something as one’s own).

 

 

-

kǎrrrr, onom. mocor yàb là mè kàrrrr their car is running briskly.

kasi, n.

kasi, n.

kàsiṅga, n.

kati fà’, v.

a red stone (formerly used instead of camwood on
certain occasions to beautify oneself: mà ko ti boṅ
add beauty ; esp. used by old people in the morning
and before walking about the town).

contemptuous smack of the tongue ;

ù taṅ a ni kasi mbi’ko̤ e? why do you challenge me
with such a click? § som mfid

cassava, manihot utilissima; § dùma, gaàali

prune (a tree or bush)

draw, sketch;
i ni ṅkati mǎ’ ṅkàṅ, he is drawving a line.

be rough, grind coarsely;
i kàti ṅgwàfṳ̯d she grinds maize coursely (either
to feed the chicken or to brew beer) ; § k, kàtikàti

put grass into the furrows, cover roughly and burn;
§ k fà’, ṅati fà’

kàtikàti, adj. rough, bumpy, stubb y; § kàci

kàtsà’ , adv.

v
kǎ’, v

very; bo kà wo ni mè ’kàtsà’ they were terribly
frightened.

stump, rest; kǎmtṳ tree-stump.

retrograde, cancel, break off;
mà ǩ̤m ndam break off the marriage;
kǎ̯m sà’ or: kǎòēm sa’ cretry, resume, quarrel or suit.

small piece; § k̤̀m

take a rest;
n’tǎ’ mà kǎ̤̌m̯̀ yà miyà I wanct to cest a little;
ṅ’kǎ̤m̯ yà take a cest.

fix, promise, make an appointment:; threat ;

bo kǎ’ mbùm yàb teoey fixed a time to meet;

i kà kǎ’ maà la’ fa ndzi mbò bo he promised to give them
clothes; bo k’ yab, mmaà ti yab they threatened them
and let them go;

syn. to bim: i kà bim igaâ, i la’ kwe ni lùm mfi he
agreed to return in the new year; § kà’ni, nod’ni, ṅkà’kǎ’

 

kan.

kǎ’ ndù , n.

kǎ uv

ka’ ̯, v.

kà’ wun, n.

k̀bti, v.

=ka̤d, suff.

ka̯d, v.

ǩ̤d, v.

=1n;--

peel, scrape; bo kà’ pà’ ṅ̤ni kè ṅko̤̍ndòṅ, ni nnuyṅ ma kùb-
ti they scrape the bark of sugarcane and peel plantains
and put them it into a bovl.

be shut., be closed;

ntsù a ka’ mṳ̍ my moauth is shut I cannot eat
because I am sick.

honeycomb; § fg’ dù

scold; appoint a day;
ba kà’ni mon i, mbi’ m’ nù, i fǎn a teoae father
scolded his child, because it had made a mistake ; § k’

large calabash for wine

shine, emit light ;
i ni ṅka’ti ni ṅkǎ’ mu’ he uses the light of a torch.

field glass, camera, level; § sonti

open eyes, look round greedily, illuminate, expose;
i kà’ṳ̯ mi’ mi he opens his eyes widely;

mà kà’u̯ mùn ni mu’ use a torchlight on someone;
§ ṡ“kǎǐ’ mu’

also: ka’ sllence, stop s.o. from talking, humiliate;
i ka’ṳ̯ mu̯̍ ntsu yò màùn le hae silenced that person.

also: kà’ γwun wild cat with black and white stripes;
§ esǎbńàm, nduṅkà’ wun

be avaricious, covet; § koṅ

1. to derive adjectives from verbs;

à nù mboṅkaàd itis alright;

2. verbal suff. to express plurality and frequency ;

bùn ndzamuy yo̤̍kad ma (̇gòṅ many people went to the
town;

bi’ ni mà tàkad the birds start to fly.

be short, be little ;
i ṅgâ, yǐ ndib ka̤d mṳ̍ he knows that his time
is short; § kà̀nti, k̤ntikà̤nti

pour off, spill;

mùṅgwi le ǩ̤ûd tsṳ̯m or le kà ǩ̤d the woman
had a premature birth; mà kṳ̤̌d ntsi pour off water;
mà kaṳ̌d mvà’ throw off waste.

 

 

k̀nti, n.

kàntik̀nti ,
k̀ntikù, n.

k̯̀ti, v.

- pp =
be dawning; § kani
also: kùli hang s.th.; § kali

shorten; mà kali mvi pvohile away the time;
mà kali k̤̍dzid shorten the journey

sigh; i kan dzaṅ hae sighs with pain.

also: ka̤dni be dawmning;
I’ ni it is dawning.

be cross with, be of ill-humour, be unwvilling ;
i bim bo ṅ’ka̤nika̤ni i bea asgrees reluctantly.

part, portion, period, piece;

kà̀nti mbùm à part of my body;

kà̯̀nti ndo̤ mà larṅndab a piece of a palmrib is on the
floor; note: kànti ṅkoṅṅwà’ n; leadpencil which has been
partly used up;

but: ni kà̤nti same meaning as above;

kà̤̀nti mà (ṅkṳ̯ nsǐ’ bo̤ in a short time; kà̯̀nti bi sǎ’
miyà after a short time; § moà kn, ka̯d, len, sà’

adv. piecemeal, piece by piece
shortlegged man or animal

pour off sacrifice, libation; kàti ńikob, kà̯̍ti bàkunsi,
kà̯̍ti ntsibàṅ libation; ba kà kà̯ti ńikoòb ni ndù’, ni

nsuṅ mb yǐ ńikòb ṅgâ, i fa bon; mbò bo tohe father
offered palmwine to his God and said to his God, he

should bless them.
mat, mainly sleeping mat; § kèpun, kèk̤̍mà’, kèntsa̯m
either, or, perhaps; i t’ mà dzi ṅgâ, kè a bub o

he wants to know whether it is so;
kè vu ka làṅ, kè ko o whether death or life or whatever.

ke, n. pl. of yum; thing, tools, monthly menses;

kebad, n.

kebli’, n.

ke kud mu̍ṅgwi ò menstruation hinders that woman
from going; ke adzàmuy na or ji̇u dza’ṳṳ̯ na the menstruation
failed (because of pregnancy).

weapons, arms

one who squints or looks obliquely;
m̌’ mùn wu’, mi’ mi ti tsini bo̤, bo fun i ṅgâ, kebli

kěǎěbù̯ṅku, n.

ked, n.

o ;

if someone is there whose eyes are not normal, they
call him ”kebli’”,
fuṅ kebli’ ùbè’ ṅgâ, i to call that kebli’ to come

swelling of glands, also inflammation of eyes;
pneumonia; § kěmbèn, kěṅkwaà’

arrow, bow; ko’ked dquiver; moâ̍ked short arrow;
i kà ta i ni ked he shot him with an arrow; § womked

kědzṳ, n. pl. of yumdzṳ food, meal;

bi e? is the meal ready?

kěǎdzṳ̯ kwa̤n muṳ̯̍ the food is spoiled;

kědzyṳ ṅkàmtikàmti firm, hard food which must be chewed;
kědzyṳ ntsintsi watery food without additives; § dzṳ

kěfaṅṅgaṅ, n. also: kěǎfaṅgaṅ things of immoderation, intemperance,

kěǎěfu̯tì, n.
kěvyàn, n.

kèkùnà’, n.

kěkù̯γo̤, n.

kěǎěkṳ̯mu’, n.

excess; § farnṅgavnṅ
deceit, fraud, swindle; § f̤ti
robbery, stolen goods

mat of fine weaving, of soft material, actually
from the wild datepalm; § kè

invisible things; § kěǎndzo̤̍vo̤
rubbish, refuse at the scene of a fire;

nothing burned is taken from a strange compound;
§ ku, mu

kěǎlàtilàti, n. also: làtikěǎ, kělàdtilàdti, làdtikě lumber, rubbish

kělě’ mbàṅ, n. stones or kernels of palm-oil-fruit

kèli, v.

kěl’ ti, n.

kem, n.

kem, v.

kěmb;n, n.

x

take s.th. ;
ṅ ’kèli bàm a ni mfam I take my bag of nails; but:
ṅ’ko̤̍li bàm a ni mfam I hang ny bag on the nail; § I’

kěǎělù’ ti-nt̯̀m comnoceort, solace; § 1̤’ti

skin of grapes, dregs of beer, remains, sediment,
wax (remains of pressed honeycombs).

squeeze, press, milk;
bimǒǎ’ bùn ni ṅkem mbi some people milk goats.

things, forcibly acquired or extorted;

 

 

=1 1; -

mg̯ mà ni ndzṳ kěmba̤n bo I co nsct eat extorted
things or things acquired by excessive effort.

kěǎěmbèn, n. pneumonia; kěmběnba or: kěmben làṅni or: kěmbènba
pleurisy; walking pneumonia; § kebo§̤̇kuṳ

kěǎmfi, n. honorary presents, things given in honour
kěmfo̤k̀d, n. uncleanliness, dirt, ugly things
kěmmà’ mǎ’, n. also: kěmà’ mǎ’ scarfs, coats, jackets, etc.

kèmti, v. refuse, retain, keep;
ù ti mà ṅkèmti ṅkab bo̤, à mi ni ndo if you do
not watch your money it will be gone quickly.

kěmu̯ wwàd, n. menstruation
kěn, n. pl. ṅkěn (a-ma) present

kěn, v. give a present; report, inform, respond ;
kěn mbò mfòn ṅgâ, b̌ mà ni nto bo̤ inform the
chief that we shall not come;
kěn ntûm mfòn reply to the message of
the chief;
kěn mb m ṅgâ, b̤̌ mà ni nto, fǎǐ’fà’ le bo̤
report that we are not coming to do the work.

kěn, n. pl. of ṅkěn age group,;
bo kà bo̤ ni kěn we belonged to the same age
group; § v̇kèn

kěndab, n. khousehold utensils; kěndà bi his utensils
kěndàtilàti, n. small insects round palmwine calabashes
kènde, n. rough millet (washed one); §
kèndzγo̤, n. visible things; § kěkṳ̤o̤, ndzo̤vo̤, yo̤
kenì, n. pl. bàkenì robbers
kěnnâno, n. drinks, beverage
kěnsu̯’nikad , n. terrible things, s.th. frightening
kěntan, n. terading goods ;
kěntan ta̯m a teohe price of goods has fallen, (they

reduce my income, because they can no more be sold
as before).

 

- (ns -
kěntsaam, n. also: kěntso̤m grassmat, woven with grass; § ke
kěntso’, n. (ma), means of power, violence, arms
kěṅgwèn , n. o
kěǎṅkad, n. travelling equipment, luggage
kěṅkwà’, n. pneumonia, pain in the side, side-stich; §
kěǎěṅwinimi’, n. delusion, things that dazzle
kèpun, n. roughly woven sleeping mat; § ka
kěsòtisòti, n. clothes (to slip into, to put on)
kěsù’, n. jewelry, precious dresses ;
b̍wi ni ṅgwe’ kěsù’ ndù bo, buṳṳ̯mbàṅ ni ṅgwe ’ sǎ
the women adorn themselves with jewels, men no

less so; § s’

kèti, v. loosen, tear off;
i kàèti mg̤̍’ he removes the burnt part of the torch;
i kèti ntò bae plucks off vegetable leaves, etc.

kǎ’, v. open, unlock, stretch, unroll, uncoil, unfurl;
no kě’ mbàùm i the snake stretches itself;
bàṅka mvi kě’ in a moment the world comes to life;
i kě’mbàùm i ku̯kaṅ be tries in vain to stretch himself;
or: he is not able to move easily.

kě’f̤̍n, n. key; yo kě’f̤̍n mà ntso madzi fṳ̯nndab bo̤ this key
does not fit into the lock; § f̤̍n

kè’ti, v. open, loosen, reveal, brighten;
ṅk̤saṅ kè’ ti ni’ mboò mi teohe chains fall from his hands;
bo ni ṅkè’ ti ts̤̍ṅni mvi they reveal the secrets of the
world; ; l̤’ bo̤ ti mà ntěǎd ṅkè’ti bo̤ it was not yet bright.

ki; v. burn full blaze;
mu’ ni ṅkǐ ki ma ndà wu’ it is burning full blaze
in the house over there; § kp,

kib, n. also: kim clav, fingernail; § kimbo

kd, v. hem, furnish with rim;
i kd ntsu ṅki’ he finishes the rim of the basket ;

 

 

 

§ p dṅ, or wà̌n̤

kikè’ mu’, n. also: kikemu’ black, cold coal; § ṅgǒ̤’mu’

kilǎ, n. also: kun bed
kilì , n. also: kilìdù honeycomb, wax
kim, n. claw, fingernail; § kimbo

kimàṅkò’, n. pl. ṅkimiàṅkò’ tortoise
kimbo, n. claw, fingernail, § ̇kibo

kǎmmu̯suṳṳṅ, n. also: kibmu̯sṳṅ bird’ s claw;
lawum ni ṅgwe ṅgob ni ṅkimi j, ntsa̤m, ṅgǒ̤ m̤̌
the hawk catches the fowl in its talons and
carries it off.

kǐmni, v. fit, fix; tundàb the roof is fixed well,;
§ ko’ni, bum

kinti, v. also: kinsi pick, pluck, tear out by the root;
bo kinti mbiyaṅ they pull up peanuts by the roots;
b̤̍wi ni ṅkinti ǩ’, ṅ̍kwe ma, the women remove
cocoyams from the stem and take them home.

kiti, v. look, observe, visit;
12 t’ o= e wil come and visit you;
ńdṅṳ = mà kiti ni; ṅgoṅgo̤ mi’ to see in passing by,
or to see out of the corner of one’s eye;
i ni ṅkiti l̤’ bo̤ ntsàṅtsàṅ he sees the place only
very indistinctly; § So, ńoli, ntsǎṅtsàṅ

ki’ki’nù , ns ku kwi’ nù miracle, amazement

ko overcome, impose by, affect by, feel;
mfo’ ni ṅko a ko I feel cold;
ns’ṳ̯n ko a ceeael ashamed;
ti ko u e? do you not feel ashamed ?
ns̯n ko a mbi’ ṅgàṅṅgo̤’ le I am overcome by that
suffering one;
note: m’ y (we a 1 have a fever.

ǩ, v. flow; ntsi, à ni ṅko a tiver, flowing water;
ntsibàṅ mu ntum kwà’ ndzampa, ni ṅko masi ndzo̍ ntsi;
your blood comes out very much and flows like water
on the ground.

 

koyγàmon, n.

kàòm, v.

kom, v.

v.

komti, v.

kàòn, v.

koni, v.

kònti, v.

konṅka’ , n.

kòb, n.

kòb, n.

kob,, v.

= 2: -

also: koyàmon skin on the back to carry a child;
§

jigger (dermatophilus penetrans)

snore; pgukgad le ni ṅkoli ni mf̯ńùm titi, ni nnan ṅgwi
ṅgâ, i ma ndi bo̤ tlkhae old man is snoring very much
at night and keeps his wife from sleeping.

scatter, destroy

smoothen, plane, carve, hew, shave;

bo kom fuṙtu mon teoey shave the head of the child ;
ṅgàṅ-kom-ty ni ṅkom t’ teeae canver is planing wood ;
§ ntsu’-kom-tu-vù, kom tu-vau, ṅku’mu̯mbàṅ

kidnap, take away; bo kǎmm mṳṅgwi they kidnapped
the woman (the one already paid for) from her owner
and sold her elsewhere, instead of bringing her to the
person who had paid for her; § wi

scrape. rasp, scratch

purify; bo foti kòn they purify the adulterous woman
(they prepare a medicine of leaves and stroke the body
of the woman) ; ;

ṅgwi n kà γǒ̤ ṅko̤ dzṳm; bo la’ mfi kòn ndu i
ṅgâ, i la’ mvi ni boni his wife went to another man
and got pregnant; they made medicine with a certain
grass and applied it to her so that she might give birth
without trouble.

also: ko feel sympathy, affected by, come upon;

mg mà ns;ṳn bo 1 co not feel ashamed;

ṅ ’koni nsṳ̯n mbi’ yi = nsu̯n ko a mbi’ yi pity him,
sympathize with him; §

stumble, be cross

§ skontnkà

wood, forest; i ma kob ṙkad ae is on bush-tour;
§ kobṅka

belt

rap with knuckles (the head of s o)) ;
i kob tù i hae reaps his head.

 

 

kob, v.

kob, n.
kob, adj.

.kob, v.

kǒb, n.

kǒ̤b, v.

n.

kǒ̌̌bbòm, n.
kǒbdu’, n.
kɑǎbgold, n.

kobkàòb, adj.

- 121 -
be avaricious, niggardly, stingy ;
i kob ti he is very avaricious ;

ma titi bo̤ don’t be stingy l

small, flat basket (measure for pumpkin seed or
pepper, etc.)

tasteless, insipid, stale;
kědzyṳ le kob ti teoe food is tasteless.

put on, cover; § kobti

bet; i tsoâti ǩb ṅgâ, i to Io’ ni kṳ̯mvi lùm
he made a bet that he would live a hundred years.

make a bet

battlefield, actually: forest where the battle takes ;
place

(a) part or hide of belly of killed game ; § baàkasi
big pearl (perhaps of amber)
golden belt

prostrated, lay horizontally with face downward ;
bo nàòṅ kobkòb tohey prostrate themselves or lie on

’ their faces.

kobli, v.

kobṅgàm, n.

roll up, roll in;

mbiyaṅ kobli toae leaves of the peanut plants have
rolled up (a sign that the nuts will be of no use) ;

mà kobli bo = mà kamti bo to close the hand, excluding
the thumb

raphia wood sp. (the large kind) ;
ndù’’ mb’ t̤̍n mè the wine of kobmbu is very strong.

belt for the knife
lay on s.o. to protect him, protect s.o. against attack.

bundle of leaves of equal size for the spider oracle;
n’ta’ mà bati ṅgàm want to consult the spider;
Procedure: a small heap of leaves of equal size with
triangular shape are put on the hole of the (i’gàm
(tarantula): short sticks which have been broken in two
are laid round the hole; when the spider comes out and

 

 

B N IN T IT (d

- 122 -
turns a leaf which is pointing to Fe, the consultor,
it is a good sign, if not, it is a bad omen; thus the
spider gives the answer.

kɑ̌bṅgùb, n. leather belt

n. place where locusts settle, so that they can be
snatched early in the morning.

ǩ̌bṅgwaṅ, n. lit. forest of salt’ in Moghamo, region round Batibo.
ǩòbṅgwa̤̯d, n. oilpalm plantation

kàòbṅgwe’ we’, n. belt

kò̌̌bṅka’, n. raphia. wood (raphia vinifera); ndu’̇ka’ raphia wine; § koòb
kobti, n. lid; § kob, ṅkobtikobti

kobti, v. cover, close; bo kobti kaṅ they cover the bovl;,;
i kobti bàò i ae closed his hand; § kobi, kamti

kobtikaṅ, n. also: kobtìmbaṅ lid of bowl or pan

koɑ̌§btṳ̯, n. forest.

kǒ̤d, n. latrine, toilet; i γǒ̤ dzi’ koǎd be goes to teohe toilet.

kǒd, v. stir, touch;
à ti kòd karṅ bo tt coes not touch the line;
ma bo̤ coco not touch it; § bad

n. court clerk

- kǎdmàùn, n. pl. kǎdbùn giant.;
kɑ̌dmùn mfo̤kad tall chap, unable to work.

kovya, n. tree sp., the juice of which is drunk as medicine against
coughing; the leaves of which are also used to treat
itching iritations of the skin; probably containing acid;
also very good to clean vessels and furniture with it.
The leaf is like sandpaper.

koyâmon, n. § sgùbmon
kolo’, n. size, height of s.th.;

yo kwà’ kolo’ tù i look at that big head; i fa bo kolo’
ko̤n mbò mu be only gives me big bones without meat;

 

 

komkàòm , n.

kǒ̌mntan, n.

g

kolo’ nù = ma –-nù nost. important matter.

stir up, instigate, stir up again (settled matter), hunt,
burst open;

bo sa’ = bo kǎm sa’ tteoaey are taking up the
matter again; dzṳm le kà kǎm = dzṳm le kà ǩ̤ d the
pregnancy was aborted; § koni

§
auction, selling articles to the one that offers the most ;
bo dzuṳ̯ mǎ’ ṅkab ni kòmntan they gained some money by
buying back the goods.
take up a matter again, agitate
also: kwo̍muyṳ spread;
nǎ koòmy tàd tohe mother sprinkles (flour into the
boiling water) in the pot; § f’
use often, enjoy, do;
y̤̌̌’ kǎdzuṳ̯, bṳ̍ ni ṅkǒ§mu a, bo̤ su’ our meal which we
used to enjoy, is fufu.
help, assist; i ni na be helps me.
begin, bend down to do s.th. ;
bo komu fà’ they bend down and start work with
a hoe.

also: kùno’ rule of a game played with palmkernel.

ṅkòṅ (a-ma), spear, sting (of bee or wasp);
§ skǎṅndab, mfaṅkòṅ

love, like ;
i kě̌ṅ mbùm i ti hae loves himself very much;

ṅ’ǩṅ mà yǒ̤ = n’ tǎ’ mà noaarnt to go.

kòmti, v
koòmu̯, v
kòmu̯, v
kom, v.
koma, v.
kòno’, n.
kàòṅ, n. pl.
kuěɑ̌ṅ, v
koṅ, v.

koṅ, onom.

be stingy, be niggard, hold a grudge against someone;
§ kob, ńam, koṅni, k̤bti

sounds hollow, k.k.k.; kuṅ tsu mè kon, koṅ, koṅ
the empty box sounds hollow, sounds a lot;
yum le mè koṅ teohe thing is terribly strong; § kadv;
à la’ mb kon, i.e. à ti la’ mbubti bo̤ it will last for
ever, it will not rot or be cestroyed.

- i -

kǒ̌ṅb̀d, n. pl. ṅǩ̌ṅba̤d bwar spear, fig. encouragement;

kǔ̌ṅfù, n.

kǒṅlɑ̌ṅ, n.

koě̌ṅnmfàòn, n.
kǒû̌̇ndab , n.
kòṅnì, n.
kòṅni, v.

koṅni, v.

ù bǒ̤ mfa kě̌ṅba̤d mbò i, i tsàṅti if you give him
encouragement, he will be pleased.

medicine staff, spear of medicine;

ni ntsa̯m koǎṅfù ni ndib Lela toue standard-
bearer carries the medicinal spear at the time of Lela.
Explanation: tg’tuwaàn flag is only a stick, called spear
with a rolled up flag. hen it opens during the Lela

at the watering place, it means that the country is doing
well, if it does not open properly, there is something
wrong in the country.

trap for elephants or buffaloes; it is a heavy iron rod
which falls on the back of the animal and breaks its
backbone.

spear of the king

pl. ṅkɑ̌ǒòṅndab the vertical palmribs in the housewall
reciprocal love
love one another
act niggardly towards someone;

màn le koṅni ti, i mà mfa yum mboò mùn bo̤ that man
is very niggard, he does not give anything to someone.

kàòṅni k̯mi’ , v. be bypocritical lit.: love before eyes;

koṅni tu, v.

kâṅṅkà’ , n.
kǒ̌ṅńùm, n.
kǒ̌ṅpepe, n.

koṅti, v.

§ ṅgaṅkoòṅnikuṳ̯mi’

shave the head (make it bald ) at night, when a

woman has given birth to an ”evil’ child; father, mother,
and grandparents come to the house and watch as

the mother of the child is being shaved.

Example: an ”evil’ child is one that comes out with a
leg first; they take it and throw it into the bush. They
call some big man, a native doctor, to do it.

It is believed that shaving the hair banishes all evil to
the bush. Formerly the same was done with twins.

tree sp. (found in the steppe)
pl. sun rays
long, decorated spear

scratch, scrape a pot, etc.

 

 

n

kěǎ̌ṅtùtu, n. spear with points on either end

kòti, v. also: kàòdti stir often
d in bridge; § kǒ’ làm,
ko’ ascend, climb, grow ;

i ko’ to̤n be climbs up the palmtree;

i ko’ bà’ ma ntumńm hae tises in the east;

mvi ko’ mu, à ǎb miyà, à saṅ it is beginning to dawn,
in a moment it will be light;

mfàn ko’, nnoǎṅ nd màùn, bim fa i bo̤ chief got
up and laid himself on the man and did not want to
relinguish him; the chief guards the refugee (perhaps

a criminal) with his power, even with his body and

life and does not relinguish him; § ṡko’ṅko’

ko’ ku̯tṳ, v. climb, ascend;,
à ko’ mà torni tit rises out of the water.

kǎ’bàm, n. weaving frame (for bags)

ko’ko’ mbèntuṳ, n. also: kwo’ kwo’ mbèntṳ voodpecker;
ko’ ko’ mbèntyṳ ni nto’ tṳ̯ mà nèbti nda i the wood-
pecker is pecking at the tree to make its nest.

ǩ̌’làm, n. symbolic bridge ;
james Po kà tǎ’ mà mà ti nda ndam bo̤̍wi iba.
Bùn ma nda. mb;ti i ṅgâ, à y ko, i ti mṳ̀ ni nto ma
nda (. e? I γâ, m mà ni nto ma nda V. bo̤, mb; n’ dam
b̤̍wi iba a. Mùn le tǎ ’ mà běǎd nda V., ndǎ’ nù bo̤̍wi iba,
ntsi’ ni; ko’làm. ames do wanted to leave the church
and marry two wives. The members of the church in-
quired as to the reason, for his no longer attending
church. Ne said, I married two wives’’. a man refuses
to attend church for this reason and puts it in first
place.
If a man refuses one thing, he takes something else
and puts it in first place, he uses it as a ’ bridge’
for something else; § ko’

’ mfòṅ, n. pl. bàkǒ̌’ mfòṅ fattened ox
kàò’mon, n. neckring for children to support the head
kàòṅndù̯̤ùm, n. owvl sp.; § kȯndum

kò’mù̯, v. aux. (followed by ma), do s.th. frequently or continuously.

 

ko’nindzi, n.

- (26: =

honour, venerate, love (help all round) ;

bo ni na kwà’ mommom they honour me in
vain; mà ko mg nù co s.th. with great care;

mà koò’mg nù mùn be forbearing, long suffering against
someone, requite good for bad

return, breathe heavily, asthmatically; copulate (of animals) ;
mbo̍ṅ ko’ ni mu̯̤̍ rain has started again;

mbṳṅ kà ko’ ni 1ǎ’ ni; ibe’ ṅkù’ the rain had started the
day before yesterday;

kunàm à kà ko’ni ni ṅgàb, à tǐ’ ni dzṳm ny pig
copulated last week and got pregnant; § ka

old, torn dress

ko’nnaṅ mùn, v. watch s .o., lay in wait; § domtci, ṅgàṅko’nnan

kǒ̌’ntsùndab
ko’papa, v.
ko’tàṅ, n.

kati, V:

ko̤, v.

n. threshold

sit on the back (said of little children)

ladder, staircase

spread, pass on, raise, boast, enlarge, overstrain, slander;
i ko’ti mbùm i be boasts; bo ko ti nù they raise
a matter; mu ṙko’ti mu’ I fan the fire; § dumcti

yam sp.
a log lying on the ground

return s.th., retaliate ;
koòd’u̯ kṳ̍lòṅ take revenge; §

shut the door, spoil (child);
ko’u̯ ndzi mǎlàm draw the curtain;
yum-ko ṳṅg̤̍ṅ yeast; § (ko ̤

get, take, receive, take over, defend

i ko̤ ntàṅ mi hae defends himself;

i ko k ba i be follows his father;

i kù’ ṅko̤ tù i mǎ’ṅka he was released, lit. he got
his head again;

ko sṳ̯ lit. take the lead, go ahead;

ṅ’ko̤ bṳ̯n mb yò màùn iit. I took over the mother s
breast from him; I took his place, because between
him and the other no child was born again; he is my
direct predecessor among his brothers and sisters from
the side of the mother;

 

nn =

i ko̤ vi she functions as a midwife;

ṅ’ko̤ bo ndzò l consent to pay the debt of the debtor;
this is said when the creditor takes the debtor by the
wrist (tam bò i) and gives him to the guarantor who
who in turn takes him by the wrist; thus the obligation
of the guarantor is fastened ; § ṡko̤ntaṅ

ko̤, p. interr. what; bi ye ko̤ mě6 e?’ vwnhat are you doing?
i kǒ̤̤ ko i mb mu̍̀ e?’ should he take s.th. from me?
ù ln yò nù ni ko̤ e?’ vhere do you know that from?

ko. v. bear a grudge, keep s.th. for revenge later;
pick (papaya, make it fall) ;
m̀ ni ṅgo̤ ki coffee, ṅgwi à ni ṅkǒ̤ ta’ papaya, mon
à ta’ mà kǧ̤ bǎ’ lam am going to pick coffee, my
wife is getting one papaya and my child wants to pick
a pumpkin.

 

kub, adj. left; ni bo kob on tene left-hand side;
ni; bǎ’ bo ko̍b left side. §

ko̤b, n. small piece, small bite ;
ko̤b nṅg̤̍ṅ small bite of bread,;
kob (̇“kwin soplinter of wood;
ko̤ ńàm small piece of meat; § tu’ nt, bà’ti
ko̤b, v. also: ko̤_bti hack small pieces, break splinters of wood,
of stone, of bread ;
wo le kobti teohe stone splinters; § v̇ko̤btiko̤bti,
kǒbkoěb, adv. shattered, in small pieces
kǒ̤bńàm, n. small piece of meat, a bite of meat

k̀d, n. penis; § vigob (tu) kd

kǒ̤d, v. fail to work, misfire (of gun); nadikàṅ kǒ̤d m̤̍ the
gun failed ; but: ndi’kàṅ ku̯ mṳ̍ the gun fired.

kǒ̤am, n. claw of a crayfish; § yad, kam
ku̍li, v. hang up; § muygko̤d
k̀m, n. razor

kǒ̤jm, onom. stockstill, quite hushed;

 

N

= 26: =
l̤̍ f̤̌ mè kǒ̤m it is quite hushed.
kǒmbamtitu , n. scissors to cut hair with
kǒ̤mkomtu , n. razor for shaving the head
koǔmtu, n. razor

ko̤n, n. pl. ṅko̤n (a-ma) bone;
ko̤n le’ni ni motoǎṅ a bone stuck in his throat;
bo ńù’ni ko̤n ṅkù mab they cracked their legbones;
§ ṡk wa’

ko̤nγǎ’ bo, n. pl. ko̤nṅgǎ’ mbo (a- ma) shoulder blade or bone
ko̤n-ṅǎ’ ṅkwà̤̯n, n. vertebra of neck

ko̤n-ṅkwà’, n. (ta- ma) rib

ko̤n-ṅkwà̯n, n. spinal chord or column

kǒ̤n, v. wipe off, smooth, polish;
kǒ̤n ndzṳ̤̌’ni wipe off sweat;
kǒ̤n ntsa’ndab smooth soil (off the floor, wall)

kùni, v. repeat, renew;
mo’ màùn kà dzǒ̤ mbi; n’to ndzo̤ni, nsuṅ mbò i ṅgâ,
ù kà dzǒ̤ mbi; mfommvi ṅkù’ndzo̤ni, ntsu ṅgǒ̤ṅṅgo̤ṅ;
i suṅ mb mṳ̍ ṅgâ, ù ko̍ni tsu ti somebody had
stolen a goat; I came and saw it and told him that
he had stolen a goat; in the morning I saw it again
and told him the same; he replied and said, ou are
repeating words’ § koǎm, dumti

ko̤ni, v. exchange, receive from one another , interfere, retort;
bà ni nṅko̤ni ṅwà’ni we exchange letters.

ko̤ni, v. sprout, germinate, put forth (leaves of banana, etc);
ṅgod coffee ko̤ni mṳ̌ mboṅka̤d teoae coffee seed is
germinating well;
ṅgod ṅgwàfṳd tu’ ṅkoni mǐboòṅka̤d the maize germinates
and developes weall.

ko̤nti, n. honorary salute ;
i bim (ṅko̤nti he greets with sincerity; § du nùmbà wuka(d

ko̤nti, v. praise, adore, venerate, greet with honorary names ;
mà ko̤nti mfòn salute the chief, honour him.

 

 

k̀ṅ, n.
kǒ̤ṅ, v.
k̀ṅni, v.
kutì, v:
kgoti, v.
ko̤ti, v.
kù’, n

v
kǒ̤, v
ko̤’; n;
v.
ko’, v.
kù’ ni, v.
kò’ ni, adj.

lamentation, weeping, sobbing; § sgy’ti

weep, lament, cry , wail; maà ko̤ṅ vu lament death,
mourn; mà ko̤ṅ fu mùn mourn someone;
mà ṅgo̤’ lament about one’ s misery.

abandon, make desolate, be lonely, shun;

bo kàò̀ṅni i they leave him alone; bie’ ṅkoṅni mè mbi
ko e?’ voby coes no one start (eating) ?

bo kàoṅni bonntsi be bo̤ mbò nǎ teohey simply leave
these orphans to the Na (no one care for them).

cut off smoothly (branches, stones);

Samuel lǐn mà kti coffee ṅgâ, à ma nti’ ṅgalaṅṅgalàṅ bo̤
Samuel knows how to prune coffee bushes, so that no
branches will wither.

have a share, assist, hit the same animal while hunting,
have a share in same fine; take sides ;

i ko̤ti ṅgàṅmi i a second helper in the hunt gets the
neck; mà koti ṅkwǎ̤ma mùn = mà s’ ṅkwa̤n take sides
with someone; § magalaà’, ṅko̤ti

rub (when washing or bathing), scrub;
nǎ sǐ̌’ mon i, ni ṅko̤ti n; tsindzi the mother bathes

her child and rubs it with soap.

wound (on the bottom of the toe)

measure, scoop, take s.th. out of;

i kǒ̤’ ked hae makes notches in the arrow.

slide, give way; ntsa’ kǎ̤ wu’ the ground there
slid or gave way; j lifod

cough, expectoration; ko̤’ ni ntobni i the cough troubles
him; i ni ndzaṅ ko̤’ he has pulmonary consumption.

cough; in the negative: not caring, not taking responsi-
bility, not replying to greetings; ù oǒ̤ ntsà’ti màùn le, i ti
ko’ bo̤ when you greet this man, he does not take any notic e.
be little (liguids, meals, etc.); § ̇ko̤’, ko̤’ti

be lazy, idle, lounge ;

bi ko’ ni mà yu’ you are lazy about listening;

i ko̍’ ni mà fà’ he is lazy about working; §

old, worn; kò̤§ ni bàm ald basg;

- (3 -

ko’ ni ṅguka̤d (better: ko’ ṳ̯ ṅguka̤d) old man;
i ti’ ko’ ni mu̍ṅgwi she becamae an old woman; § ko u

kò’ ti, v. limp, hobble (on one leg, because the other is injured) ;
ṅ’ ko’ ti ni kù a 1 limp with my leg;
b’ ke b yo lmp on both sides ;
i ni ṅko’ ti ko ti he is hobbling about; § ko’cikù

v. be small, little, be less, minor;
ṅko̤’ ti ba ù e?’ am I too small to be your father? § ko’

kù’ tikù, n. a kind of game with one leg; §

kù’ ṳ, adj. also: ku’ o old piece;
ko ṳ ndzi old, worn out dress;
ko’ γ ndab old, decayed house;
ko̍’ṳ̯ kuṅ old box; ko̤’̯ kun old bed ;
ko ṳ̯ ṅguka̤d old, overworked man; § ko̤̍’ni

? ss

ko’ ̯, v. make smaller or less, be smaller, reduce; ko̤̤ṳ̯ kǎ bò,
ntsam a take these things and have mercy on mel

kpṳluṳ̀̀ṅ, onom. plop, plumpi
kpùndṳ̀̇, onom. plop, plumpi

kpwa’, onom. suddenly, crack, clap; bi i bǒ̤ mbùmti mèàè kpwa’
kpwa’ if you suddenly meet him.

krǐ̌mâd, n. christmas

kù, n. pl. ṅkù (a-ma) lesyg, foot; ko loṅ lesg of chair;
kǒmbad or (teooct of hill;
bo dzid kàù ńin boà bo they walk together, are of the
same opinion;
bo tsu ti ṅkù mab they go together;
màùn le yǒ̤ kù i sà’ that man has already gone far
ahead; ù swe’ kù u ndza̤m mù you have left me,
turned away from me;
ma ntso’ kù u γâ’ bo̤ co not move from here;
kù i mùn hae takes offence at s.o., is scandalized ;
mà tsi kù masi stamp on the ground, to curse s o.
(by knocking at the ancestors ’who should hear or knov);
i ts̤ěûd kù i hae kicked s.th. with his foot, (if it bleeds,
it is a bad omen and causes him to return, but if some
soil collects on the toe, when stumbling, it is considered
to be a good omen and he can continue his way) ;
wě kù a a cramp affects my lesg;
ṅkù ma nṅṳ’ tǐ ṅuṳ’ti my legs are numb (deprived of

 

 

 

ku, n.

ku, v.

kùb’ṳṅn.

f-

feeling), suffer from pins and needles;

tamti ṅkù mu spread your legs (said to a pregnant
woman, when giving birth);

ṅ’kà γǒ̤ wu’ ṅkù ma ited have gone there thrice;

ù mà mbo ni kù a bo̤, k̤̍ bo̤ ni k ba ù bo̤, u bi wo̤ e?
you are not attached to me nor to your father; who

are you actually attached to?

mà dza’ ti k ṅgwi mùn step over the foot of a married
woman, seduce the wife of another;

bo yǎṅ tsaṅ ni ṅkù mi they have tied his legs with chains;
§ kfà’, kondikàṅ, ni,
ǩsun, bikù

corpse, dead body, dead, useless thing;

ku bin your dead people, corpses;

ku esu the dead body of jesus;

kumbaṅ a broken pot; kumbùm corpse;
kumbùm yg’ our dead man or child;

kumàn, pl. kubùn or bàkubùn dead human being,
the dead ; §

kundikàṅ bad, useless gun;

kunsi , pl. bàkunsi the burried ones, the spirits;
kunù caead things, infertile matters;

kuńàm corpse of an animal, cadaveric animal;
kuts̤̍ṅ broken jug; kuyum dead thing, decaying thing.

die, exhaust ;

i tǎ’ mà ku he is dying;

mandzi ò le ku mo̤̯̍ this road is dead, can no longer
be used ; bo ku fà’ they are exhausted from work;

i ku là̤̯;m he died of old age;

i ku laan hae died from want of, from lack of;

i ku muni he died by the sword;

woè, ṅgab ku ndo̤ ntenten o goshi the antilope died
racing; i ku ndzi hae died of hunger;

i ku mfo’ he died of fever; i ku ṅgo̤’ he died of misery;
i ku ṅkòd he died in a dispute;

i ku toòṅ he died of lust, (another person exploited
his lust and made him collapse); mùn bǒ̤ ndzṳ kědzy,
ǎ mbon i titi, mbo̤̍ bo Iǐn mà ńd’ i, mbi’ kǎdzy yàò le
bo̤ ; ku tòṅ if somebody enjoys the meal too much,
people can kill him, because he goes on eating while
danger is threatening him; he will collapse;

ṅu b̤̌ ṅku ited, mbo̤̍ i to fa when three months have
passed (died), he will give it;

ntsù a ku ti, γ̤̌ la, nt’ mâ ntòtàòṅ I have not had any-
thing delicious for a long time; go and get some meat.

bet, wager; maà csoti kùb bet; mà vu kùb (lose;

 

kùbli, v.

kùbli, v.

kɑ̌bntsù, n.

kùbti, n.

kùd, n.

kd, v.

kud, v.

kud tu, n.

3132: -
mà dzṳ̯ kùòb win; § ṡkob, ṅgàṅṅkùb
deceive, cheat, swindle; mà kǐb mùn deceive s o.

comrade in arms, fight, etc.
yab tt is their fellow-soldier.

be blunt (of point);
muyńi à kùbli ti ny knife is very blunt.

deceive, double-cross ; § esǐ

also: kɑmntsù (a-ma) lips ;
à kuṳ̯ndùn my upper lip;
à matso̤ṅni ny lower lip.

flat, oval, wooden vessel or bovl, carved out of one
piece of wood.

work ;
t dzi’ mbdm ; ni kàùd . he makes;-an. offort at work.

work, do

tie, (also of loincloth or any other material), bind;

mà kud ndab build a house, esp. with palmribs, etc.;
mà kud ntsà̯m (nd m’ mùn) devise an evil plan;

mà kud ntso̤b tie or bind a charm;

mà kad (ika’ tie a fence of raphia ribs;

mà kaud (̇wà’ni bind or wrap a book;

mà kud tsen knit one’s brow (with indignation) ;

mà kaud vin tie grass in bundles for the roof; § ṅkɑ̌dk.

force; § kutu

kùdbaṅgòṅ, n. person who is working for the town or village and is

kudbàm, n.

kùdfaṅṅ gan,

kudkàòṅ, n.

kudmbo, n.

kudtu, n.

kudtumfàòn ,

then dismissed without reaping the fruits of his work.
belt

n. excessive work

also: kukòṅ small bird with long tail feathers

(a-ma) self-acquired knowledge or ability, not inherited

turban, wreath, headgear

n. pl. kudtufɑǒnfòn king’ s crown

 

 

=̯3;3 -
kùdvo, n. vork done in vain
kuɑ̌dzìd, n. (a-yab) journey on foot, march, journey through life

kuɑ̌dzìd kòmkoòm, n. the particular gait of a councillor, solemn walk;
§ dgàaṅṅkad

kɑ̌fà’, n. fellow worker, colleague

kùka’, n. basket made of split palmribs

kùka’ dù, n. bee-hive

kùka’ ṅgob, n. basket to carry fowls

kukòṅ, n. also: kudkòṅ small bird with two long tail feathers; it
loves the rocks and waterfalls. The tail feathers are used
for tsoòod (a big hat with feathers; they are very expensive).

kukòṅ, n. lagegard, sleepy-head; o kukàṅ e? are you a sleepy-head?

kùkùb, n. also: ku̯̍kùb lizard sp. (colourful)
kù’kùb bo̤ ṅgàṅtòṅ, i ni ntǎṅ tǎṅ the lizard is a glutton.

kùkùn, n. also: kù̯kùn fern, “eagle’s fern
kùkunṅka’, n. termites which build mushroom-like houses ; § ko̤̍kùnṅkà’

kuku’ ton, n. lower part of the leaf stalk of the palmtree,
used for beating the clay-floor firm; § van, to̤nmba(ṅ

kuku’tso’ , n. ulcers which do not heal (caused by syphilis)

kùm, n. pl. γǎṅ-kùm man with mask; if someone meets such a man
on the road, he will be beaten, but not, if he has a child
with him; but if he has taken a child along in order to
pass without trouble and this suspicion is verified, he
will be beaten, even more severly, despite the child in
his company; § tfukùm

kùm, n. society, club; mà no kùm crink in that society;
bṳ̍ ni nno kùm ma nta̤d Fotikali we drink at the club
of Fotikali; kom le ka ni nno e? (̀gàṅ, à kà ku does
that club still exist? No, it “died’̀ f falls
to refresh the club; kùm nnono drinking club

kùm, n. rumour., voice, reputation of s.o.

kùm, n. (a-ma) skeleton of a house-wall

km, v
km, v.
kùmbad, n.
kùûmfòn, n.

kùm nsòso,
n.
kùmti, v.

kumti, v.

kun, n.

kundab, n

kundam, n.

kundìkàṅ , n.

kuntan, n.

= 13 -

repeat, point to, apply to, pass ;

ṅgàb bi ited as three weeks have passed;

lùm bi vwhen the year had passed;

lùm mǔ̯̤̍ a year ago;

nù le kɑmm ndù ù kàè ṅgaṅ e?’ That suits you, doesn’t it?

knock, beat, push, pound, stamp;

mà kuɑǐm bo masi beat the ground with the hand;

mà kuǐ̤m kù masi stamp on the ground with the foot,
mà kuɑ̌m wo masi pound the ground with a stone ;

these three different actions should have the same effect:
to knock at the ancestors’s, so that they hear the curse
of the offended person, spoken against someone; § csi

pl. ṅkǔmbad (tcseooct of a hill

1 ) the secret power by which the chief is dominated
and by which he governs.

2) the double iron bell which is carried and beaten in
front of the chief, if it is beaten, people run away;

d bo̤ nď’ ṅgwi mfòn, ṅgùmbà ù nn ka̤nti tṳ̯ ke ni;
mf̯n ndzàm if you seduce a wife of the chief, the
Ngumba kills you with a short club or with the handle
of an ax; § ṅgùmba, tun ṅgùmbà, mṳko̤ṅṅgoṅ, mṳ̍kaṅkaṅ

n. also: tukùm vweooden mask to be put on
(a-ma) lips; § kobntsù
knock; maà kàùmti ntsùndab knock at the housedoor
join, unite, sew (strips together);
kumti ndab erect housewalls;
kumti nsun renew and fasten friendship;

kumti ndzi sevw cloth together, alongside; §

(a-ba) 1) bed, ?) bier (for sick people); if the same bier
is used for a dead person, it is called g’̤la.

dead, dilapidated house
nuptial bed
useless gun; § ku

(a-ba) market, companion, mate;
i kuntan y’ it is our market place.

 

 

kuntsa’, n.
, kuntum, n.
kuntuṅ, n.
kunwvu, n.
kuṅ, n.
kɑ̌ṅgo̤’, n.
kɑ̌ṅkad, n.

kùɑ̌ṅk win, n.

kùṅndṳ̀m, n.

kùṅni, n.
kùṅni, v.

kuṅti, v.

kuɑṅwà’ni, n.

kuńàm, n.

= (31: =

dried up soil, soil void of manure;

à kà bo ni lùm, à kà Iǎ a, m’ fà’ yǎ kědzṳ bǒ̤ ma
kuntsa’, kěǎědzy ti bòṅ bo̤, ale m’ bo̤ ṅgàṅ-ndzi it was
last year that I planted on poor soil, the vegetable s
were no good, so that I became a hungry man.

(a-ba) ambassador;
bo tsi’ a ni kuntùm yab they made me their ambassador.

my other ego which buries me, when I die
= ny best friend;
bo ni ndzid ku ńin we go the same way together.

death bed; also cloth with which the dead are wrapped;
the son-in-law has to get it and pay for it; fig. inseparable
friend. husband may say of his wife: i kunvù a she is
my deathbed , my closest. friend.

box, coffin, trunk; kuvṅmbo̤̍ṅ gutter; kukuṅ a bad box = kan,
y’, kobti i kǎm a one without cover; kuṅmàǎ kǎ offertory.

way of the cross, vain walk

fellow travelle r;
i kíṅkad yab hae is their travelling companion;
bo i tso teoaey go together, are good friends.

split wood, log

also: kàòṅnd(ù̯̀m owl sp.;
à kà bo̤ ni mbońùm, kòṅnd̤̍m ṅko̤ṅ ni m’ tṳ̯ ma ndzù’ a,
“bùwuoâ̍, kě ” ṅkw̤dṅkuù’ once, in the evening

x, n

an owl croaked on a tree in my compound bùwuàò ’ or

n

ṅk w̤dṅkuù ”.
enema; the Bali use the narrow neck of a pumpkin.

administer an enema

embrace; mo’ mṳṅgwi kà kwe Iǒ’ mat b mfad i
bàùmti, ṅkuṅti mbùm yàb, ni ntsa’ti some woman
returned from the coast and met her brother, they
embraced and greeted each other.

(a-ba) school companion;
ǎ ni yàb it is their school companion.

pl. bàkuńàm pis;
kuńàm fod m(̯̤̍ teohe pisg is fat.

 

kuńàm, n.

kusǎ, n.

kusun, n.

kuti, v.

== 136 =
decaying, dying animal, cadaver
cucumber sp.
(a-ba) fPriend, comrade;
i kɑ̌sùn yab heis their comrade ;

bu’ i kǎ ṅkad kɑǐ̌sun ku̯gs̯ kwà’ nuṳnǹ̯m we had a real
friendship formerly.

tie, bind; bo kuti vin they tie bundles of roof grass.

kutimù̯ndzù, n. tree, used for medicine

kutsè’ ni, n.

kutu n:

poor man; ji bo̤ màùn, i ni mfà’ kà̯ mu̯ ndzuṳṳ̯ bo̤ a; màùn le
ni mfà’, bàyan to, ndǎ’ kědz le, i ti’ ntsi ka̯̍ mu ndzuṳ bo;
bo fuṅ yò mbom màn ni kutsè’ nìi mùn γǒ̤ ma ṅgwa̤n bià bùn;
bùn be bi kwe, ntsa̯m kědzṳ̍ bab, i kwe mboòmbo. bo fuṅ yo
mbom maàn ni kutsè’nì a poor man is someone who
works without having something to eat; when he works,
thieves come and take his food and he then sits there
without it. Such a man is called an empty-handed person’.
e goes to the field together with the people; when these
people return carrying their crops, he returns empty-handed.

also: kud tu feorce, power

kuyum. n. pl. kukě dead things, useless th.

’

v. aux.

colocasia root (col. antiquorum); § ko’ -tfsu ,

be grown up,;

) n ko sho has reacledsthoe day before
her being grown up, (euphemistic for: she has got her
first period) ;

yo ṅgònṅgɑǎn mà nted ntum ntsà’ ni; ts’ bo tuis girl
gives no indication of her being grown up, she has not
yet had her first period.

grow; be enough;

t,

à k’ it is enough; § ko’ni, ko’ti
o’

to denote repeated action: again (placed after the tense
marker, followed by the prenas. form of the verb);

i la’ kǐ̌’ nto (= m̌’ ṅka) he will come again;

i kà mbèd i hae refused him again;

note: ko’ often follows the neg. particle or mà;

k̤̍̌ kǐ’ no more; also: ti ko’ and maà (ṅkǔ’ no more;

i kà y̤̌ k̤̀ nto bo̤ he went and never returned;

à ti kù’ ntso ni nù bo itis of no use anymore;

 

 

 

= 3 =

i mà mbim nù le bo̤ be coes not consent anymore;
bo mà ni ṅku’ ṅgǒ̤ ma wu’ le ndib mandzà̤̯m bo̤
they did not go there again later.

ku’ màγàbà , n. (loan from ouala: big colocasia rooct, makabo);
§ ko’, tsu’

kù’ mu̯, v. pile up, collect, gather ; § bom

kù’ ni, v. suffice, be suitable, be appropriate ; § ko’nni
kuɑ̌’ nsu, n. lily

ku’ ṅka, n. fruit of the raphia, cone-like fruit, § ṡka
ku’ ṅkambù’, n. fruit of the big raffia; §

kù’ ti, v. add, increase, make sufficient;
kù’ ti mǎ’ yum alda s th.;
kù’ti ntsi add more water.

kuɑ̌’tsu’, n. smaller colocasia

kù-, pref. 1) to derive nouns, (mostly abstract) ;
kṳ̍bàn hatred; ko̤Bnd vweight, heaviness; ko̤̍t̤d pride;
k̀ńa’ single hunt
2) to derive nouns, adj. in the sense of
not, without, un-, in- ;
ka̯̍mdum ummarried, husbandless;
ù bǒ̤ mbo̤ k̤̍kùd, ù dzṳ dzṳ̯ e ?’ if you are a non-worker,
will you eat?
kběǎṅmàsuṅ unspeakable, not fit to be told;
k̯̍dzid lame; k̤tu senseless.

kù̯P...bo̤ neg. particle introducing subordinate clauses referring to the
same subject (always with bo at the end of the neg. phrase).
not yet, without;
i mbuṅ bùṅ, kṳ̍ bo̤̍ni bi m’ ṅka bo̤ she erred about without
returning again; i kwà’ mùn, k̯̀ těd mmaàè’ti m̌’ mbo̤’ bo,
ndzǐ moò̍’ he is the man, who before finishing one loaf
started another one (he is restless, unsteady, jumping from
one th. to another); ;
mùn mà ndǐn mà y6 nù, k̤̍ bo ṅgâ, nkòb bo̤ no one
can do anything without God knowing;
suṅ mbò i ṅgâ, i dzun yǎ kědzṳ ma ntan, k vo̤’ti ṅkab
mommoòm bo̤ tell him he should buy my food on the
market without wasting my money for nothing;
ma (ì̇gǒ̤ ku̯ntà̯(d, ǩ̤ bim mfa̤d ù γo̤ sǎ bo̤ do noct go to the
palace and do not allow your brother to go there either;

ku̯, v. aux.

= (3; =

ku̯ is also used to answer a question, it refers to a new
thought, often a question;

nù le kà dzaṅ u e, k̤̤̍ dzaṅ bo̤ mu e?’ did the matter
offend you; why should it not?

to dencote: only, just (always followed by emph. bo) ;
sometimes replaced by kg ’ repeat”,

negative: no more;

à kuṳ̯ mbo̤ yò le tt is only that;

à kṳ̯ mbo̤ bùn ited there are only three people;

bo ṅku̯ ntsi bo̤ ni ku̯sṳ bo i mandz̯̀m sě6
they rested only on the first and on the last day;

i mà (̇̇ku̯ mbo̤ ma ndà i bo heis mo longer in his
house;

mu ku̯ kàti bo̤ l̯ṅ màùn, i yě nù mbuṳka̯ d nd mù a

I shall only cross the name of the man who is doing
wrong to me.

ku̯m-, prop. of direction: to and fro, in, up, on, above (ref. to higher

kṳ̌ , y. aux.

kù̍bàn, n.

kùbaṅ, n.

places); opposite of ma which refers to any place;

ku̯taṅ attic, upper story; ku̯wa’ ti on the stand, frame;
ku̯tàli veranda, piazza; ku̯s̯ in front, ahead;

manadz;̯̀m behind; ku̯gt̯ above, up, on (on the tree or
from above the tree, etc);

ku̯ńàdmbad on top of the hill, towards the top, from ...;
ku̯ûṅko̤ṅntsi on the bank of the river, from the bank ni

§ kundzo’, ku̯mvi, ku̯ndàùn, etc.

to denote repeated actions (followed by the prenom.
form of the verb): do always, again and again,

used in present and future tense;

mfàòn ǩ̯ ntum i mà tisoṅ the chief sends him again
and again (regularly) to the station;

ù ǩ̯ ni ṅkiti you are looking again;

in neg. phrases ǩ̯ precedes the neg. part of maà:

i ǩ̤ mà ni ntan bo ae coes not trade again;
mà ni ṅgo̤ ma ndǎkù’m bo 1 co net usually go
to the drinking club.

hatred; i bn i ni; ko̤bàn he hates him with passion; § bn

long basket, carried by women; § kom k̤baṅ

ku̯̍b̤nnswen, n. tree sp. (flexible, tough, found in the steppe) ;

ku̍bi, adj.

s’

kù̯̍bù’, n.

§ ntsǎmb̌nswen
untrue, perfidious; § ṅgàṅ-ňk̤̍bi

block, stocks ; § loṅ̍ni

 

 

- 13g -
ku̯̍bɑ̌̌ṅmàsuṅ, n. unspeakable, terrible things, events
kù̯dza’ ṳndab , n. grippe, influenza; contagious febrile disorder; § ta̤mtu
kùdzìd, adj. lame, unable to walk
kù̯̍dzo̤ṅmbad, n. slope
kù̍fàd, n. towrn-section in Bali-Nyonga
kùfefe, n. insects
kùfi’ ti, adj. inexpressible; §

kù̍fom, n. nisery, wretchedness, tiredness, fatigue, exhaustion;
k̍fom wǎ i be is breathless (from racing or carrying
loads);
ka̯̍fom dzyṳ u = à ni mfa’ fà’ kṳ̍ yo l̤’, u tsi, ni mfoti
a bo̤ you are working without finding a place to rest.

kùòfomndzù’, n. ruins, debris
kù̍f̤a adj. tepid, lukewarm

kuṳ̀fo̤m, n. hunscger, lack;
k̤̍nf̤m tso ma (̇goòṅ, famine entered he country.

ku̯̍kad, n. basket, made of grass (ntsa̯m); § tam, ṅgwǎńkṳ̍kad, kṳ̍ka’

adv. in vain, unsuccessful, with pain;
i ni ndzid k̤̍kaṅ, he walks with pain;
bo tǎ’ mà wěě mbi kykaṅ teonhaey tried in vain to catch
the sheep.

ku̯kǎṅgob, n. cockscomb
kù̯̍ûkǎṅkǒ̤§, n. expectoration

kù̯kǎṅko̤’, n. also: kù̯kǎṅṅko̤̤ bush sp. (with long leaves) ;
ṅgwi Matsi’ ya kà vi mon; bo tà’ sisùṅ bo ku̍kǎṅko̠’,
nto, ndz’ ma ntsù nda i mà y ṅgâ, mùn b̤ ni ndâā,
i ṅgâ, mmbod ma ndab y’, mbo̤ mà nàn mon e,
mbi’ bùn mbyṳka̯d mà to ni ntobni mon le teohe vife of
Mutsiya had born a child; they looked for grass and leaves
from the bush ukankoe and came and framed the door of
the house with it to indicate to the person that passes there
that a baby is in the house and also to protect the child ,
because bad people might pass by and trouble the child.

 

 

 

-1o -

ku̍kàṅnì, adj. unclean, unfiltered;
a ndù’ k̤̍kàṅni it is umnfiltered, palmwine.

ku̯̍kà’, n. soplinter, chip ; scatter with bird-lime (to catch beetles)
kù̯ûka’, n. round and deep basket, woven with split palmribs; §
kù̯̍kǎ’ ked, n. point of arrow (made of hard plant material)
ku̯̍kǎ’mu’, n. torch

ku̯̍kǎ’nd̀ṅ, n. soplinter of the harder part of a palmrib

kù̍ûkǎ’ ntsù, n. lip-plug (peg) worn by some womaen in the lower lip
kùka’ ṅgòb, n. bastket for fowls

kùkà’ ṅkab, n. tally (piece of wood, scored across with notches )
ku̯̍kǎ’ ṅkì’, n. basket-ribs round which material is woven

ku̍kǎ’ ṅkòṅdzi’, n. (ta-ma) nose-peg; §

kùkǎ’ ṅkwà’, n. (a-ma) ribs; § konṅkwaà’

kùkì, n. N.N., refers to persons or things which are not mentioned
by name; zjigori the land of someone.

kù̯̍kòṅ, n. laggard; § kukoṅ

ku̯̍kɑ̌ṅkùd, n. shirker, skulker, lazy person

kùko’, n. unleavened bread

ku̍kùb, n. also: kùkùb lizard sp. (coloured)

ku̯̍kùd, n. lazy person, unemployed person;
ù bǒ̤ mbo̤ ko̤̍kùd, ù dzo̤ dz̤ e? if you do not work, will
you eat?

ku̍kùn, n. also: kùkùn kind of fern

n. chaff (of millet), waste; bo ton k. they burn the chaff.

ku̍kǔ’, adv. not satisfactory, unseemly

kù̍k̀n, n. also: kṳkùn termite hill;

k̯̍k̤̍n bo̤ ndâ baàsuy’ṅgo’ (. is the house of the termites;
§ ṡkà’

 

 

ku̯̍ûkw̯d, adv. without thunder ;
mb̍ṅ ku̯̍kwa̤d rain without thunder;
mbṅ k̤̍kẁ̤d lo a lightning from a bright sky; fig. an
unexpected case of death came to my knowledge.

ku̯̍kwa̤d, n. kind of nettle which is boiled and eaten; § sis, sisińad
kù̯lan, n. poarasite; § bàakp§̤an

ku̯̍lasi, n. engl. kerosene; § (ikà’ ko̤̍làsi kerosene drum

ku̍la’ ndamùn, n. courier, post; (lit. he cannot sleep in somebody s house).

kùù̯d, n. wveicght, heaviness;
bi tso’ k̀í̯̍d ni tù i take the burden from his head, i.e.
take something of his disgrace or insult, i.e. console him;
màùn bǒ̤ nto ma ndzù’ ù, kědzṳ mà fa i ti bo̤, mo’ mùn maṅkoṅ
ndzù’ to ni mǎ’ mo kědzuṳ, mfa i̇go̤̍n le, yi, i to a; le bo igâ,
màùn tso’ kund ni tu ṅgàṅ ndab le if someone comes to
your compound and there is no food for him, someone
beside your compound vill bring a little food and give it
to the stranger who has come; this is how the burden is
taken from you; § l̤d

kù;li, v. admonish; § kuyli

kù̍ii, adj sleepless; n’tsi k̤li I sit here sleepless.

kù̯l, v. struggle, make great effort, press on, urge

ku̯̍lòṅ, n. i kò’ ṳ ko̍íòṅ he took revenge; § 1Iǎṅ
kùlo̤ṅ, n. swing (of climbers and creepers)

kùlun, adv. nsct
kù;iùṅ, adj. lifeless, dead
kùì̯m, adj. stale, saltless, bad

ku̍lù̀̀ṅ, n. corpse, torso, trunk; ko̤lo̤̍ṅ t̯; k̤̤̍̍ṅ = màùn, pi, tu i
ma mbo̤ torso of human body.

kù̯iṳṅ, n. unimportant person, of no importance

ku̍i̤̍ṅndab, n. body of a house without roof

s

kù̯màd, n. smallpox; mfuṅkṳ̍̀màd pock-mark

’

ee

db MMM MMM MMM

- 12 -

kù̯mbam, n. pudding made of fresh maize, wrapped in leaves
and boiled in water; § bo’mbiyaṅ

kùmfemfe, n. pl. k. i ṅko’ small beetles
kùmì, adv. incessant; § mu’ ko̤̍mi

kù̯mi’ , adv. in front of (the eyes);

malam kuṳmi’ mu e? bo you have specks on your eye?

kù̯mpàd, v. also: kù̯pàd
1) kick or pull a leg when wrestling;
2) to get s.th. by ko̤̍mpàd (by knocking another
person’s hand that holds maize or groundnuts,
so that it falls and can be quickly snatched) ;
i ko̤ ṅgwàfṳd ni kṳ̀mpàd he got maize by a trick.

kùmpì’ , n. flute made of plain ribs; kind of dance; § lea

ku̯mu̯, adv. unfortunately, regrettably (precedes the noun) ;
yd ṅgàṅwà’ni le, bà Iǎ ntum mboò mfòn a, i ku̯muy
ṅko’̯ ni mb bo yγâ’ bo̤ this pupil whom we had
sent to the chief, was sent back again to our regret;
ṅgṳ̯m kua̯muy nto, ti mbubti kěǎědzṳ̯, mma’ bùn ni ndzi
unfortunately the locust have come, spoiled the
crop and caused the people to be hungry;
ndzo̤ i kṳ̯mu ṅko’u̯ ni mb m̤̀ a, n’tǐ’ mà làb i, mà ti
i, i yo as hae sent him back to my regret, I wanted to
slap him and let him go.

kù̯mu̯, v. also: k̤̍mu̯ ṅg wàfṳd = mà t’ mu ṅgwaàfd ni ṅkoòṅ mi
remove the kernels from the maize cob.
bo ni mbi yγǒ̤ lm (ṅgo̤̍ṅ, ṅk̤̍mu̯ ṅgwàfṳd (ṅkuṅ, when
they want to grind maize, they remove the kernels
from the maize cob first.

kùmu̯’ , adj. without reply, speechless, dumb,;
bo v̌̌ k̤̍mṳ̯’ they became dumbfounded.

kù̯mvi, adv. outside, in the world
kùnà, n. wild date palm (phoenix dactylifera); § ntǒkù̯mà ,
kù̯n̍bti, adj. uncircumcised

kùndum, adj. unmarried (said of women)

k̯ndùn, prep. on, above, lit. kg̯ ndùn on surface;
ku̯ndùn tu à above me or above my head;

 

 

- (113 -
§ mandàn, nindùn, ndùn

kù̯ndṳû̀ṅ, adv. with power, crashing;
i v masi mè k̤̀nd̤̀ṅ he fell down with a crash.

kù̯ndzù’, adv. at home, in the town (not in the field) ;
§ ntsu’-yγo̤â-ku̯ndzù’

kù̯nindoṅ, adv. in heaven, to or from heaven
kùno’, n. also: kàòno’ play-rules at the palm kernel play
kùnta, n. toy, child’s play
kùntsù, adv. mo access, no mouth’”
kùmù, adj. unsuspecting, without s.th.;
ù tsi ndab ko̤̍nù, nù (ma) mbenndab (.)
you sit at home without knowing the trouble
outside the wall.
kuṳ̀ṅgud , adv. without handle, hilt;
mugńi knife without a hilt; fig. a person
doing so or so evil, doing nowhere good.
ku̯ṅkà’, adj. in the grassfield
kùńà, n. megalomania, boasting; § ko̤̍to̤d, ńa

ku̯̍ṅà kě, n. also: kùṅà mu̯wàd interruption of the period for some
months without a sign of pregnancy; (such a woman
has access everywhere and does not need to creep
through the small opening of the mat-fence and has
not to avoid anything).

kù̍ńùmtì , adj. unmixed, unadulterated; md’ k. unmixed wine
kùńa’, n. single hunting ; § ńa’
kù̯pàd, v. also: kù̯’mpàd kick or pull a leg when vrestling

kù̯ûà, n. (a) reputation, fame, rumour. report ;
ku̯̍aà i ko’ his fame spreads (rises) .

kùsaṅ, adj. tailless; § mv ku̍sanṅ
v. take a woman from her family with the intention of

marrying her, without submitting to the rules, without
settling the bride-price.

kp tm psa ka e dnm mm

 

= la; -

kù̯̍sǎńùìm, n. sunrise (between seven and eight o’clock); § sě

kù̯so̤’, n. hiccup; kso’ y i, aà bǒ̤ ndzè u, ù no mo ntsi, à boòd
the hiccups trouble him; if it troubles you, drink some
water and they will subside;
ù bǒ̤ ndzy ntò ti bo, kso’ ta̯m u, ù bǒ̤ ndzyṳ
ku’ bàṅ, ntò ti bo, ko̤so̤’ tam u if you eat a banana
without additives, the hiccups will trouble you, the same,
if you eat colocasia without additives;
k̍s̤’ tam a I was dumbfounded , did not know what
to answer by surprise.

n. child whose mother becomes pregnant again too early
and whose feet and lower eyelids therefore swell; § fon;
wě i swelling befell him. (It is believed that
swelling of feet and lower eyelids amoung children under
three years of age is caused by their mother’s renewed
pregnancy).

n. jug woven with grass; bo ni nta̤m ku̍suṅ ni ńń̤’ bo tsa̯m
they weave the grass jug with fine grass and a very
tough fibre from the forest.

n. grass jug, filled with raffia palmwine
adj. new, not yet washed; ndzi ka̤̍sù’ nev cloth
kù̯ù’, adj. sudden, surprising, unexpected;
kusǐ’ mbàṅ nto, nù tsà yṳ̯ mà fa kědzṳ mboò bo

an unexpected group suddenly came, it was too much
for us to feed them;

bṳ̤̀ Iǎ’ ntum ma nda ((koòb, ku̯̍sǐ̌’ mbo§̤̍ṅ wo̤’ ni mv
we left the church, unexpectedly rain suddenly fell.

kùsǔ̌’ mbṳ̯̀ṅ, n. rain shower (sudden one)

kù̯ìsǔ̌’ bùn, n. mass rally (which was not previously announced)

kùsù̌’ ndìkàṅ, n. much -sudden shooting, firing of guns

ku̯sṳ, n. the first; moù ku̯sṳ̯ bo̤ wo̤ e?’ who is the first?
ks buṅù, ṅkà̤̀d ynǐ kṳ̯b masi the first stood up
and poured his bowl on the ground.

ku̯su , adv. ahead, in front; ks mu̯̍ also: kyṳsṳ̯ à in front of me;
ku̯su̯ b̤̍’ also: ku̯sṳ̯ yo̤’ in front of us; I ku̯s̯ go ahead,;

but: i ko̤ mu su̯ he went first, went ahead ; § ṡ̍kuṅ

kùòta, adj. unstitched, not sewn

 

 

 

= kan; :

kùòta, adj. fatherless; i mo kṳ̍ta he is without father = orphan
ku̍taṅ, adj. innumerable, not counted

ku̯tàṅ, adj. above, in the attic, upper floor; § can

ku̍àtòn, adj. tepid, lukewarm

ku̯̍tob, n. affliction, torment, agony; § tfob
ka̯̍tob bo̤ mà fa (i̇go̤’ mb bùn affliction causes the
people pain.

kù̯toṅtom, n. terial, tribulation, one who refuses a witness

kù̍tûd, n. pride, haughtiness ;
ṅǧṅ ni nsaṅ ni kâṅnsà’ a town of haughtiness
is suddenly destroyed ; § nàù ko̤̍t̤d, kṳ̍ńà, tǒ̤ûd

kùòtsini, adv. incorrect, not just; not stopping;
i ni ṅkyṳ ṅgo̤ γǒ̤ k̤̍tsini bo̤ be just goes without
stopping; vgàṅtsǒ̤dsa’ kè ncto̠ṅto̤ṅ the judgment
is not correct.

kù̯àtsu, n. pl. bàk̯̀ûtsu a dumb person;
kṳ̍ksu v tam the dumob one fell into the pit (.) =
one cannot make oneself understood, just as a dumb
person who fell into a pit, cannot be heard.

kù̯òlsu, adj. dumb, unable to speak ;
i v k̤̍tsu he or she became silent or fell silent.

kù̯òhu, adj. headless, without prudence, senseless; heady, obstinate;
fà’ ku senseless work; yan le ko̤tu ti the thief is
very obstinate.

ku̯tu, adv. from above, upward ; parallel to kundùn = region near
Bans-M bundam

ku̯tṳ̯, adv. lit. on the tree = up, upward, from on high, towards ;
mbo̍ṅ dzṳni k̤̍tṳ the rain is grazing’ in the sky, it
will rain soon ; bo ko’ ni yn they ascended with him.

n. small mouse with big eyes and bushy tail; § mbad

kù’o̤, n. unknown, strange thing ;
ù bàti ṅgâ, ṅ’kǎ, mà mbi yo̤ kǎdzṳ e? (nṅ’ kà yoo̤ mù’. a mà
mbo̤ yum ku̯̍’o̤ bo̤ you think that I have not yet seen
food? I have seen it; it is nothing strange (unknown).

- (116 -
kùummbo, n. pl. bàkù̯umbo pauper, penniless person

ṅgo̤suṅ, n. talkative person, people who talk of unleard things

ku̯, n. pl. bàkṳ namesake; ku̯ à my namesake; bàk̤̀̍ ba ny namesakes;
§ mbumbù

ku, v: be ripe, mature; be obstinate, butt-headed;
i ni ṅkuṳ̯ bo̤̍ tu he is pig-headed.

ku̯, v. burn, go off (shot) ;
mu’ k̯ ndab tohe fire burnt the house;
but: màùn le tǎn ndab that man burnt the house;
ndikàṅ k̯ mṳ̍ the gun fired;
but: ndikàṅ ko̤d mṳ̍ the gun failed;
note: with complement only , when mu’ is subject
to ku̯; à ni mè teohe fire is in full
blaze; § bab, kěkṳ̯ mu’, k

kṳ̯ûb, n. climber, creeper sp. (of which chairs are made) ; § ndy’
ku̯b, n. small cooking pot
kub, v. loosen, peel, (e.g. groundnuts); stamp from envelope,

open things ;
my ni ṅkṳ̯b mbiyaṅ ma γǒ̤ mbi I scrape off the husk
of peanuts and go and plant them; § dzeb, adzub

kṳ̌bγa’ , n. ulcer in the armpit, lymph inflamed;,;
k bya’ mà nt6d mbi bo̤ the ulcer has not yet come
to a head.

kṳbti, v. scrape off (soil from the housewall)
k̍bti yà’ bi scrape off the bark;
k̤̍bti ntsà’ mbènndab scrape off the soil from the
wall of the house

ku̯bti, v. change; kybti ṅkab change money;
i ky̯bti màd i he changed his character; § b̍ṅni

ku̯btṳ, n. flat wooden vessel

kṳ̌d, n. excellent one, most difficult one (person or kind);
k̯d mon i his best child;;
ǩ̯d naṅ mbarṅ the best cook;
kd ṅwà’ ni the best pupil;
k̤d the excellent ivine;
kd taṅ the most difficult calculation;
ǩ̤d mùṅgwi the best, most efficient woman.

 

 

- 1 -

kù k̤̍nṅkà’, n. termite sp. (not eaten) lives in mushroom-

like mudhouse; § ko̤kgn, ṅgo ’ ko̤̍kuṳn

kùkṳnṅkà’, n. also: kù̯k̯̀jn termite hill (mushroom-like as in the

kuli, v:

kǔm, v.

ku̯mti, v.

kùmuṳ, v.

kṳ̀ṅ, onom.

kṳ̯̀ṅni, v.

(nn n’

ku̯’ k̯’ , adj.

v;

kun.

steppe); § koù’kunnṅkà ’

also: ku̯li admonish, spur, push, incite, make an effort;
i kuli t̍n i he makes an effort;
i ku̯li bùn ni t̤̍n he spurs the people powerfully; § p’ ṅṳd

nail, join; kò̤mtfi mfam hit the nail;
ts ’ mṳ̍, ko̤̍mti the stool is out of joincts, fix it.

learn, remember, think of, remind; kgmti i, ; to ni ndzi
le remind him to bring the dress; kgmtcti ntsu’ le, bà
kà suṅ a remember the day, we have agreed on.

take off the seed from the maize cob

cling, sound, cracking sound;
lǎṅndab tsu mè ko̤ṅ , kṳ̍ṅ, kṳ̍ṅ the corridor makes
a clinking sound, when one is walking on it.

dash off, descend swiftly, roll down; remain;

bi to, bà k̤̍ṅni, nswi mbàd o come, let us dash

off and go downhill;

i ku̍ṅni ku̯tu ndab, mv be rolls down from the

roof and falls ;

b̤ Iǎ ’ kad kě bu, ṅko̤̍ṅni i lob we have taken our
luggage, some remains.

be burdend by something;

mo’ mùṅgwi kà Iǎ’ dzṳ̯m mon, rṅkuṳ̯’ titi ṅù swibo, ndzi vi
a womamn became pregnant and was burdened with this
for nine months, then she gave birth.

oblique, slanting; mǒ’ ndab ntsi ku’kṳ̯’ a house
inclines and is standing obliquely; i ci’ ntsi bo̤ ku’ ku’,
k̀ tsi ntsinika̯d bo̤ it stands oblique only, not upright;
màòn le ni nazid bo̤ ku̯ ku̯’ , i kṳ̍̀mṳ̯ ndzid ntsinika̯d bo̤
this person is walking as bent with age, is unable to
walk upright.

be difficult;
yo nù ko’ ni a ti this matter is too difficult for

me (to settle); § es tsàni

put, place (as to prevent view or being carried away);

-u -

kg’ ti ladṅkèd mà ntsùndab put the roughly woven mat
at the entrance’l

kwà, nu. four (when preceding the noun) : kwà bùn four people;
kwà bǎ’ mvi the four chief points of the compass;
kwà tundzi yab teoe four lappets of the skirt;
kwaà tù bi his four points ;
kwaà b’ Ioṅ the four corners of the throne; § bǎnm-
kwaàkùm bag with four parts; § ikwaà

kwa, v. avoid, go on level ground, on same level, level;
mà kwa ni so level the ground vith a hoe;
bà-juda kǎ ṅkwa bàSamaria the jews avoided Samaria;
§ kwacti

kwǎ, v. level, scrape with a hoe, remove (leaves);
kwaǎ màndzi clear the road, e.g. of grass;
kwǎ nd̤ṅ take the leaves off cut palm-leaves ;
§ bani, ṅkwâk w

kwǎ, v. impoverish s.o. (by eating too much as a suest);
bo kwǎ lammbo mùn le they made him poor, lit.
they scraped his palm.

kwǎ, v. having diarrhoea; bom i ni ṅkwa kwǎ his belly’ is
clearing, he has diarrhoea.

kwǎkùd , n. parrot
kwakwàd, n. European gun, breech loader; § ndikàṅ

kwàli, v. heap up soil; bo kwaàli ṅg wàfṳṳd they heap soil round
the maize plants.

kwǎm, v. svall, spring up; cause bursting by swelling with
water.

kwammi , n. (teorce, wilfullness, spite, contempt ;
i sǎb nù ni kwammi’ he swears perjury wilfully;
i γǒ̤ ni kwammi’ he goes by force majeure’,
wifhout genuine consent;
n’no yò fù ni kwammi’, à ti I arink this potion
with contemopt, it is very bitter.

kwǎn, v. pull through lesgs ;
i kwàǎn ndzi i he fixes the loincloth (behind the

girdle and pulls it under the legs to fix to the
girdle in front).

 

 

kwaṅ, v.

kwan, v.

kwaṅa, n.

kwaṅa, n.

= ns:

be sour, be bad or considered bad ; ;
ndù’ le kwaṅ ti the palmwine is sour” strong;
§ kwaàṅni, tsan

have want of, lack;

i kwarṅ yum hae does not have enough, is lacking.
leaves of the dzu’ko’tṳ-yam

also: ńokwaâṅkà’ poisonous snake about So cm long,
black and white, is found near fensces. It is said , that
it shoots itself at a person, so that its head enters the
body like a spear; both die thereby.

kwàṅgam, nu. forty; § ik wà

kwàṅka̤d, n.

kwàṅkù, n.

kwàtad, nu.

kwàtadrfrgam

kwàti, v.

kwati, v.

kwati, v.

kwà’, adv.

something old, of no use, bad;
ndù’ le bo̤ kwàṅka̯d i the palmwine has its age,
iìs old or bad;

bo fa mandzǧ̤m kwàṅka̤d i they offer bad wine
afterwards, at the end.

quadruped

seven (ikwà - ited);
sa’ le vɑ̌ kwàtad kùm tohe lawsuit has reached
a deadlock; lit. seven kàùm (parts of a scaffold)
cannot make a house; § ṡkpu’

, nu. seventy

scrape the skin with a knife; challenge, make
furious by posing questions;

i ni ṅkwaàti kàù’ i, i Iǎ’ ntǎn a he peels his cocoyam
which he has grilled on the fire; § ṅkwatikwati

evade, go on level ground;
kwati, a bǎṅ ’ go welll (greeting to a person going
on same level ground)

breed ; ;
ṅgob ni ṅkwati mbùm the hen is hatching eggs.

(emph.) exactly, just, really, only;

a kwà’ mf;d à it is really my brother;
kwaà’ tâ’ tu ù you alone, only you;
kwà’ yi tâ’ tu ; he alone;

b̤̍ ni mbu’ mbo mb (ikòb, ni mbu’ kwà’ ṅkù my’

 

 

kwà’kwx’, v.

kwà’ ni, v.

kwa̤dkwa̤(d,

kwa̤dni, v.
kwa̤(dniko̤n,
kw̯dti, v.

kwà̯̀n, n.

kw̤§̌n, v.

- (s; -

ni nsà’ ni mfu̯ńùm ṅgâ, bṳ̀ la’ ndzo̤ mi’ min we pray
day and night that we may see you; lit. we clap hands
and stamp feet; § ndindi

cut with cutlass, clean, clear;
mà kwàǎ’ ni muyńi clear with a cutlass ;
kwàǎ’ màndzi, mfàni ma ya’ clear the way up to here.

have diarrhoea; bom j ni ṅkwaà’kwaǐ’ he has diarrhoea;
§ fatimb̤d

examine, consider, think, tempt;

bo kǎ ṅkwaà’ni màùn le they tempted that man often;
bo kwà’ni tù yab they consider;

(also used in framing the housewall with raffia ribs,
so that the mud will hold); § yaṅuṳ

kwa̤dkẁ̤d, v. chew, eat (contrast to dzy) ;

bo ni ṅkwa̤d ńàm boà mbiyan, ṅgṳ̯m ni ṅgwàfṳd, ni
ndzy ṙg̤̍ṅ boà bimo’ kěǎě mboṅkad they chew meat,
groundnuts, locusts and maize and eat fufu of maize
and other delicious foods; bo kwa̤d nsòṅ mab nd i
they grind their teeth on him, (angry).

roll, thunder, growl (from stomach), clap;

kw̤d it thunders ;

bo kw̌d mbo mb mfòn they clap their hands to
greet the chief.

adv. in heaps ;
bo no ṅgo̤ kwa̤dkwa̤d they lay the grass together
in heaps.

consume one another; § kwani
n. rheumatism
shake off; § kwà̤ti

catarrh, cold;
mfo’ bi ko a, kwàn bi ni mà y a when I felt cold,
I got a catarrh.

be half ripe, be half cooked, not yet done;

kědzṳ̯ kwǎ̤n mǒ̤ the food is only half-cooked;;

mban to kw̤̌n the ulcer comes to a head;

mbu̍ṅ kwǎ̤n yṳ̯’ the rain has made us ’half-cooked’,
the rain has given us much trouble;

j, a v̤̌ v̤ a, à boòṅ, à kw̤̤̍ n kw̤̌m better half-cooked

 

 

 

kwani, v.

kwàì̀nti, v.

kwàṳ̀nti, adj.

kẁti, v.

kwàì̀ ni, v.

kwe, v.

kwěd, v.

- Is1 -
than spoiled = better less than nothing; § ṅkẁ̤ntika̤d
also: kwa̤dni consume one another

also: kwùnti grow slowly, be backward in growth ;
bofà bon b̤̍nku ti dzòbti ṅgwen ni nsà’ bo̤, mbi’
mà kẁ̤nti children should not tell stories during
the day, otherwise they remain small and do not
grow anymore; (this is to fool children) ;

bo kwà̤̀nti sa’ mà tso̤d they retarded the issue of
the lawe-suit.

retarded, short; kẁ̤nti mùn a short man, retarded
in growth

also: kẁ̯dti shake off (from dress, etc.) or from
o.s., shake, sieve, winnow, ;

Sam, u to ni mbǎ’ mbà’ e? (ṅgayà, m’ běd ṅkwà̤ti
ṅkw̤̌m Sam, will you come in the morning? No, I
refuse and beat the shoulders with two hands;

(this is a strong refusal, he shook his shoulders) ;
bo kwàti ṅgṳ̍ṅ they winnowed the cornflour;

i kwàti nda i he winnowed’’ the house; he emptied
it as a sack;

mṅkuṳ̯ ṅko̤sṳ̯ ni ṅkwo̤ti mṳ̍mi’ the boy goes ahead and
beats off the dew from grass;

kwà̤ti ṅki’ ṅkaṅ, y, mba̤dṅkaṅ madzi i a shake the
beer vessel in which some sedimaent is left, so that
it can flow off; § (ki

also: kẁ’ ni act not, do not, go not (contrary to plan)

return home, go home ;

n’tǎ’ mà kwe I want to go home; y̤̌, ̇ kwe kà go and
return soonl Greeting to those leaving;

bà kwe, mbàùmti au revoir, till we meet again;

bo ṅkwe they turned and went home;

i kwe ndzumz (r.) he luckily escaped in a tricky trade;
ṅ’kwe bàmbo I returned with empty hands;

bo kwe ndz̤̀mndzà̤̯m they relapsed, went backward,
deviated or swerved from s th.;

bo kwe nda mfòn they returned from work at the
chief’s palace;

ù kwe to your health’’, (said to s.o. who has sneezed)
lit. have you returned?

tie, hang; kwesd i tie it (the dog, etc.);
mà kwèěd ntsurṅ tie the upper part of grass (as a sign

kwedti, v.
kweèn, n.

kweni, v.

kweṅ, adj.

- (1s2 -
for the adressee to come quickly; a letter which was
formerfly sent in this form, a tied bunch of grass) ;
ko̤ ntsuṅ ò, mfa mb i (ṅgâ, i yo̤ na ni mbǎ mbà
get this letter and bring it to him so that he should
see me in the morning; § kweci,
stop s.o.; § kweti

lizard sp.; big, about 3o-o cm long, also aquatic

return slowly, recover;
i kweni he recovered slowly (from fainting).

coloured, variegated

kweṅkweṅ, onom. imitation of sound of native piano laun

kweàètiì, n.

kweèti, v.

kweèti, v.

kwe’ foò, n.

small loincloth; mgmobaàṅ ni ṅkweti ndzi, b̤̍wi ni ṅkud
ndzi a man ties his cloth, women fasten their cloth
by tucking it in; § mok wati

tie, bind; mà kwecti mbi tie a goat;

bo kweti ṅgǒ̤̤ ma fà’ mfi they tie grass on a new
farm to indicate to others that they want to farm
that part; § kwěd, sǐ’ndzi

also: kwèdti stop s .o., retard journey ,, delay;
i ni ndzid, ni ṅkweti ma màndzi he walks and often

Ngumba, executioner;

kwe’ fò kà ńǎ’ mǒ̠’ màùn, yi, i kà Iǎ’ ṅgwi mfàòn a
Ngumba killed somebody who had taken a wife of
the chief; à kà bo mùn bǒ̤ ndzě nù mbṳkaād,
kwe’fàò ńǎ’ i formerly when a man committed

some crime, the Ngumba killed him. (Ngumba is a
secret club: bo ni nno ṅgùmba ku ntǎ̤d mfòn ni ntsu’
zoɑ̤ěnṳfuṅ, ni mbu’ ṅgùmba, ni ńń̤ṅ ba̤n

they drink Ngumba in the palace on Pzimufung which
is the Sunday of the Bali-Noṅa.

mà bu’ ṅgùmba is to bet the iron double bell)

hold back, recede from (plan, intention) ;
bo kwe ni ntaṅ they gave up their purpose; § kwò̤’ni

maize bread; §

leave unploughed, fallow, (also: hair uncudt) ;

 

 

 

-u; -

ba ma§̯̀ kwi’ yò fà’ ny, feather left this farm;

ṅg̤̤ kwi’ ma fà’ the grass grows very quickly on the
farm; i kwi’ tù i he leaves his hair uncut (sometimes
because of sickness or mourning); § azǒ̤’ tu, dzǎmfà’

kwi’ kwi’, n. niracle, s.th. astonishing; kw.kw.mao’n funny man;
n’ dzǒ̤ měǎ’ kwi’kwi’ nù yγǎ’, à tsǎ have seen s.th.
miraculous here, it’s above my mind.

kwoòmu̯, v. spread; § koòmuy

kẁli, v. flatter, seduce, betray, allure, entice

kwà̤̀nti, v. also: kwì̯̀nti be stunted, remain small

kẁ̤̤nti, v. also: kẁ̯nti grow slowly, remain small

kwò̤̀ti, n. also: kwètì small loincloth; § s nadzi

kwà̍ti, v. go bent, creep (also of animals, sleeking cats) ;
§ azwěǎ, ndzitso̤̍ṅni

kwo’kwo’ mbèntu , n. also: ko’ ko’ mbèntṳ woodpecker

ni, v. stay away (without reason), refuse to do s.th.;
i kwo̤’ni ṅwà’ni ndi he stayed away from school
to-day; bo kwèo̤’ni i they caused him to stay away
or behind; ṡ’kà ka’ mà to yâ’ ni ṅkù’, moǎ’ nù fed
a, ṅ’kwo’ni I promised to come here yesterday,
but s.th. kept me, so I stayed away; § kwe’ni

