L

s-

l-, pref. sguzolsn;l, eye, pl. mi’

la, n.

glide rail (for house doovr);
la ntsundab gliding rail of the traditional door; § paàkoùb

la, adv. (emph.) certainly; yo̤ la’ go nowl

lǎ, v.

làbindàò, n.

Iǎbti, v.

pass by;

i kà Iǎ he passed without a word;

i Iǎ mè wid he passed quickly;

ndù’ lǎ ni mi’ mi the wine went to his head, lit.
passed his eyes;

Niokòb lǐ mṳ̍ ndǐ i God blessed her, she became
pregnant ;

à Iǎ ni ko̤, bi yè yo nù e?’ what has happened that
you have done this?

à Iǎ yin, ndzo̤̍ tu kà I kam a (.) it passes you, you
lost the opportunity, as the head of the crayfish has
no head, ( because it missed getting one, when they
were distributed ) ;

bo bati i bub mà I my̯̌, nnuyṅ i ni sa’ they question
him thus to trap him and institute legal proceedings
against him;

my 1ǎ ni ṅgàm le, ni nsuṅ nù m use the
conversation to tell them the Gospel;

1â, à bǎṅ good journey ;

màndzi ka ni nda the road is still used; § dza’

therefore, but, however ;
lâ, a ndi ... but now -; l, ndzo̤ wall then, although

flog, beat; lay in heaps; settle;

bo 1ǎb yab ṅgwàn ndzamuṳ̯ they whipped them a lot;

i Iǎb ntsu ṅgòṅ bùn me’ he kept them all silent;
ṅkwa̤_d bùn Iǎb masi the crowd settled on the ground ;;
bo 1ǎb ndàli teoney beat the bed (they beat the clay
of which they make the naa(i); § b’

lavendar ;

làbindò bo̤ měǎ’ mboòm ṅgò, yn, dzd i boòṅ a
lavender is a kind of herb that has a nice scent;
bo ni nneèbti mǎ’ mboòm ṅg w̤d ni làbindò

a type of cosmetic oil is made from lavender.

beat frequently, knock, stamp; i lǎbti kù i ma si
he stamps the ground (in order to call on the

 

 

lǎd, v.

lad, n.

lad, n.

lad

laγùm, n.
làγuma, n.

làli, v.

lam, v.

lam, v.

=2s;s: =

ancestors as witnesses for the truth of his case) ;
bo 1ǎbti ṅkèd they knock at the mat-fence (to
announce their arrival or to beg admittance).

be irresistible , be unyielding, render harmless ;

mà ma ’làd make big effort, toil, drudge; § ṡgaṅàd,
ba’ṅgaàń

hard work, quarrel;

yo màùn le ni mma’ ad ti this man is forcing
himself to work hard.

page (in a book), sheet, leaf, plain, disc;

surface of a banana leaf;

ladmǎàm pane (of window) ;

ladṅgùb mbi a sheet of goat-hide;

ladṅgùb mfòṅ cow-hide; ladṅkèd piece of
rough-woven mat;

k’ti ladṅkèd ma ntsùndab put the piece of mat,
the door-mat, in the entrance;

page in a book.

lick; ad lanṅkǐ mfòn lick the sole of the foot.
of the chief (as a sign that one has not concealed
anything) ;

mon le lad bo n i the child licks the hand of its
mother; § aei, lu̯ṅ

also: lawùm hawk

tinder; § là wuma

stroll about, turn round;

ù ni ndali fàli you are passing over it without
caring; § ndàadlilàli, yaṅ

forge, smithy;

ṅgàṅtsilàm ni ntsi muyṳńi boà so mbo̤ ndzàm

the smith is forging a knife and hoes and axes;
§ tsi làm, ṅgàṅtsilàm, nsǐ’làm

bird-lime;

bo ta̯m làm they fix bird-lime (small sticks with
lime) .

marry; ndam marriage

stir; lam (̇go̤̍ṅ stir maize (while cooking)

 

làma, n.

lammbod, n.

lamni, v.
Iǎmnsi, n.
lampùd, n.

làmti, v.

lan, v.

lan, v.

lanbo, n. pl.

lankù, n. pl

Iǎ ndi, adv.

lam, v.
lanwo, n.
làṅ, n.
laṅ, n.

laṅ, n.

- n-

creep, climb, spread; wind, twist ;
mbiyaṅ ni ndam the groundnut plants creep;
nù (̇ikòb lǎm ni ṅgǎṅ mvi me’ the Gospel spreads
all over the world; § ndamndàm
also: so Voma iron tool (belonging to Voma) ; there
are four pieces; it seems they have got lost;
(̇û̍ṅṅgùm the smith who could make them again; he
was accepted as a companion of the Bali.

bush beans
marry one another, marry many
person crawling on the ground, because of infirmity
(loan from Engl.) lamp, lantern
climb about, go along a rope, go slowly, crawl;
ù bǒ̤ mbi ma ǩ’ ndo̤̍ṅ, ù ndamti làmti, mbi’
mà vɑ̌ ma ntsi when you cross a bamboo bridge,
you go along a rope, lest you fall into the water.
be clean, clear, friendly, pleasant ;
tsèn ti lan mb mfòn he pleased the chief;

§ là’ni, ndankad, ndani

mourn; also: mà vu (an is no longer in use, only in
compound nouns: § bǎkṳ̍Blan)

lanmbo (a-ma) palm of hand
. lanṅkù (a- ma) sole of foot
really, in fact:
ṅkǒ̤’ṅgob toṅ mo̤̍, lǎ nd; in fact, the cock has already
crowed;
mfàòn to m(̤̍, lǎ ndi the chief has, in fact, come.
also: lammu̯ be ignornant; § la̤my
also: lanγwo, rock

ram, buck (not castrated)

floor, level ground; § farṅndab, laṅndzàù

also: tsu’ ku’ màkabo fufu balls of colocasia

ku’ màyàba, i ntsu’tsu’ pounded cocoyam

 

laṅndab, n.

laṅndzù’ , n.

làṅni, n.

làṅndali , n.

làṅni, v.

làṅni, v.

laṅntan, n.

laṅntsiìlìbà ,

laṅṅkà’ , n.

laṅti, v.

lati, v.
làtikě, n.
lawum, n.

làwuma, n.

là̯m, n.

=ě̌s -

win (a lot) ;
yàǎ mo bed làǎṅ mṳ̌ my lot has won; § bd

reception room, entrance hall; § ann
courtyard

lightmindedness, frivolity ;

ṅ’kà y nàù le bo̤ ni làṅni e?’ Nave I done this
frivolously?

entrance hall, floor in a room

be stupid, be frivolous

be completely full, full to the rim;
à lun ndàṅni it is full; § nadàṅ̤làṅṳ, ndǎṅni

market place, publicity ;
bo fati i ku laṅntan they put him to shame.

n. the bottom of the sea

grass steppe (with scattered trees or bushes) ;
§ skànṅkà’

be complete, accomplished;

à bǎṅ ndaṅti = à b̌̇ mmeè ti it is complete.

quite full; à lun nadàṅàṅṳ it is full to the brim.

step on, proceed to;

n’tǎ’ mà sà’u’̯ mǎ’ ko’, la kò’ le ti bàṅ bo, n’ ti’
ndàti, ntum ndza̤n mò’ I wanted to cross a certain
bridge, but the bridge was not good; I then proceeded
on and and came out on the other side; § ndàtilàti
lick; § lad

also: kěǎlàtilàti = làdtikě or kělàdtilàdti; lumber, rubbish

also: layum hawk

also: làγuma = ṅkù’ nì’mu’ tinder (fine fibre from
palmtree)

deep water, pool under waterfall;

ntsiì o dzam là̤̯̀m ti this river has many deep areas;

- ts: -

i kà γǒ̤ ma fub madzi Ià̯m, mbi ts wu’, l̤̯̀m ṅko̤ṅ
mon i he went (out of despair) into the water but
the water bewailed his child , when he reached there;
(he hoped for comfort, but did not find it) ;

fig. ’ he got out of the frying-pan into the fire’; ; kà
vɑ̌̌ ma l̤̯m, ṅku he fell into the deep water and died;
§

lam, n. heart (in a spiritual sense) ;

Iàm yab san me (ṅwǎ̌ṅ their heart split’, they
were frightened;

Ìm yin ma nsan bo̤ do not be afraid, lit. let your
heart not be troubled ; § ntṳ̯m

lamṅgwàfuṳd , n. full maize cobs;
biìmo’ nnaṅ lamla̯m, ni ṅkwa̤d some cook the whole
maize cob and eat it.

lam, v. wrap, wind; § nda̤mla̯m
v. split;

mà ľ̤̯m yum vyò̤̤̌’ to split nearly through the middle;
ù bǒ̤ ntǐ’ṅgâ, ľ̤m ṅgoòṅ a γo̍ro̤’, ṅkṳ̯ mbim bim
if you want to share my land with me, I agree.

lam, v. wind round (croots, layers or climbers of plants)

’

dzu’ ni nda̤m ni tṳ̯ yam is climbing round a stick.

v. stink, small;
dz̤d i ľm mè its small stinks;
à lǎ̤̌m, mfo’ti it is sweet-scented .

l̀m ntsuṅtsuṅ, n. beetle, kind of b.; ntso̤ ni mbyd l̯̀àm ntsuṅtsuṅ
the grub developes into a beetle

l̯̀mti, v. sniff at, nose, snuffle; I̯mti ṅgâ, à bòṅ e sniff it,
whether it is good.

l̯̀mti, v. be split, cleft;
malà̯m l̤̀mti mug̯̤̍ me’ teohe glass is broken into pieces;
mà l̯̀mti ṅkwin to split wood

lamti , v. wrap, tie spirally; la̯mti vin le tie that grass together,

lam̯, v. also: la̯mmṳ̯; linger; not recognize again, be ignorant,;
m̌’ màùn by’i kǎ ntsi a, kà yo na, nda̯muy na =
bu̯ i kà lo’ ni kṳ̍̀ oni bo̤ someone together with
whom I had lived , saw me, but did not recognize
me; (we had not met for a long time) ;

 

s

ù lin a m̌’ ṅka bo̤, ù lamu. na e? do you not
know me again, you do not recognize me?

n’ď’ ṅgâ, ù boṅṳ nto ni; ńùm iba n) k̀nti, ù ti to bub
bo̤, ù Iǎ’ ndamuṳ̯ ma ya e’? ( told you to come quickly
at 2.3o p.m., but you did not come; where did you
linger about? § fg ’ni, gib

small fish trap
pass the night, lay;

i Iǎ’ nda’ bo̤ mvi sàṅ he slept restlessly
till daybreak;

la’, tense marker to denote definite future;

là’ mu̯, v.

la’ nd̯̀m, v.

la’ ndzì, v.

là’ ni, v.

la’ ni, v.
Iǎ’ nsɑ, n.
la’ saṅ, v.

tas v.

Iǎ’ tsi, n.

i la’ to ni ṅgàb he will come in a week;

bà me’ti yò ṅwà’ni ṅgâ, n’da’ mbi kwe, bo bo̤ druck
let us finish this letter that it will be printed when I
return. also used in narrative:

à la’ mbo̤ ni moǎ’ ntsu’ at a later time;, later.
support, guide s.o. who cannot walk without help;
support with poles, etc. ;
mà là’ my tsù speak slowly

last overnight (rain) ;
à tsi ndzo̤̍ mbṳ̤̌ṅ ò le to la’nd̯̀m a it seems that
the rain will continue during the night.

pass the night in hunger, fast

forget, forgive; ask permission, take leave;
n’dà’ ni mṳ̍ yǎ ṅwà’ni I forgot my book.

clean, rinse; enlighten, open one’ s eyes; § lan
fishtrap; § nsu
spend a sleepless night

mend ;;
i la’ ti to’ ndzi she mends the holes in the dress.

small paper bag (for salt, etc.);

bo Iǎ ’ tsi nto bni ni ntsi, ntǎ tǎn ma mu’ , à toṳ̤n, le bo̤
Iǎ’tsi they take salt and mix it with water and heat it
on the fire, until it becomes firm; this is called lx’ tsi’.

also: lěb bear, carry (e.g. a bag over the shoulder);
n’ tǎ’ mà lǎb bàm a, rṅ̇gǒ̤ ma ṅgwa̤n I want to carry

làdka̤d, adj.

la̤dndab, n.

la̯dti, v.

lu̯ li, v.

làn, adj.

ln, v.

la̤n, v.

la̤n, V:

lnṅguka̤d,

lati,; v:

le, p. dem.

-

my bag over the shoulder and go to the farm;
i 1ǎo mòn le nazǒ̤ bàm hae carries the child like a bag.

weight, heaviness; §

be heavy, be difficult, inconvenient;

tù a Ǐd = tù a wu’ = nsuṳn ko a 1 feel ashamed;
tù a Id mà to l do not want to come;

à ni nd̤§̌d bo it is inconvenient for them;

ù Id ti you are very difficult, disobedient;

i ti’ m̀ṅgwi l̤̀d she is heavily pregnant; S ?,
nd̤dka̯d

difficult; before noun: nù difficult matter ;
after noun: nàù nd̤dka̤d

line or face of inner housewall (of palmribs)
increase; § ti
make cumbersome, heavy, slow; § Id

old; à l̤̯n nù it is an old matter;

a nù bàl̤̀m bùn it is the matter of the old people;
§ nd̤̀n

be or become ald;
i kà Ǐ̤n ti he was very old.

lack, want; i tsi ni; ln he is lacking s.th. ;
i ku la̯n he dies of want.

beat, wound, deal a blow;
my to la̤n u I shall beat you;
mbòṅ ln y̯̌’ the rain has beaten us.

n. pl. bàlǎ̌nwuka̯d old man, old people

also: l̀(dti; increase, be mumerous;
nyṅ, à put mores, increase;
ṅgob le mbùm, à lati that hen is laying more eggs.

sg. (also occasionally used in plural, but placed after
the noun) this, that, these (only in connection with

nouns, referring to s.th. already mentioned) ;

ľ̤’ le, bo kà yǒ̤ wu’ à, bu’ ti the place which they

had visited there, was very ugly;

mun le that man;

bun be teohese people;

 

 

= (ot =

nàù Tità sǎṅ ni le mbù’ me’ the Gospel spread in

that region very much; ;

y kwà’ màùn le, bà kà yo niṅkù’ a this is the same
person we saw yesterday;

bo kà mà ndn mà y nù ni ile bǎǐ’ ṅgòṅ bo̤ they
could not achieve anything in that part of the country;
§ be

lě (ṅgàṅ), v. spread slander;

lebṳ̯̀, n.

Lela, n.

lela, n.

led, n.

led, v.

ledndab, n.

ledni, v.

ledti, v.

lèli, v.

lèmti, v.

lèmu, v.

i lěṅgàṅ nǐ tù a he spreads slander about me;
§ děṅgàṅ

put on, hang round; fig. be in the service of s.o.;
i lb bǎm mfàòn hae carries the bag of the chief,
he serves the chief; § ndebleb

tree sp. (found in the steppe, fire resistant)

1) feast of redemption beginning of Pecember;
2) dance after redemptive action

flute of bamboo; § ko̯̍mpi’ flute of palmrib

tick; led dzam nd yò ńàm ti many ticks molest
this animal.

stick on, hold to;
i led bò i ni ntsù i she helds her hand to her mouth
(to drink out of it).

porch, veranda; § led, la dndab; ṅgàṅledmbo, le ni
be sticky; § leni
catch up; § eti

be infectious, contagious ; ko̤’ lèli ti cough is infectious;
yoò bo̤ dzaṅ ndàlilèli this is an infectious disease;
i kà leli y’ ni dzaṅ mfo̤’ he infected us with the grippe.

leap over, spread;

mu’ le lèmti the fire has spread;

à mà mbǎṅ nù le kù’ ndèmti madzo’ bàùn, ni ṅgo̤ sus

bo̤ it is not good that this matter spreads and becomes
known to the people.

be very quick in doing s.th. or in speaking;
i lèmuy tsu ti he speaks too hastily; § lè’mug

 

 

= B; =

(

lèn, n. resin, used to make grass-calabashes water-tight, or
to repair broken calabashes; lèn 1ǎ’ ni ty mbṳ̯ resin
derives from the Mby tree; lèn dzen, ndzid; bo tsy’ti ṅgâ,
lèn dzid madzi tad ndù’, nnanti bon b̌ǎ̌’ madzi resin
melts and flows, it is shaken so that it flows around
in the wine-jug and closes small holes.

lěn, v. stick, glue, make water-tight
len, n. place, stand ;
no’ ti womwom len itàn make five heaps

of ten; ten maize cobs each; § ;’, kà̯̀nti

lenba̤d , n. battlefield

lenfà’, n. working place, work obliged to be done, measure
of work
leni, v. also: ledni be sticky, stick to s.th., be quarrelsome ;

nan yùm le ndenilèni the sap of that thing is sticky;

ù leni mu, ko lâ you hang on to it, keep it;

n’ti leni? ba ndɑ̌ ta’ mù ńin bo did not attach myself
to anyone, I did not become a burden to anyone.

lenntsa’, n. village area

lènti, v. paste s.th. over, tighten, mend;
bo lènti ndzi they mended the cloth;
màn le lènti mbàṅ ndù’ ṅgâ, à ma ndzwe’ bo̤ that man
tightened the palmwine pot, so that it will not leak.

lenti. v. silence (with promises);
i lenti mon i she appeases her child with promises

leṅgè, n. big mouse

lèṅwà, n. insult, term of abuse and invective ;
m̌’ mo (̇kwàn kà tsàb a ṅgâ làèṅwà nṅkan ((̇kan fu,
ṅkan bàṅ, ṅkan si, or: lèṅwà kuńàm, mbitsò ’)
a boy of a slave mocked me and said, monkey
(monkey white, red or black, or: pig, chimpanzee).

lesoa, n. November

leti, v. also: ledti catch up, pour into;
i leti ked ni; babtiba̤d he wards off the arrow with
a shield;

tsi’ kàùbti ma ntsenlàṅ, ndeti mǔ̯̌ place the
wooden bowl under the eaves and collect the rain.

: (uB;BE -

lè’ mu, v. speak slowly and drawn out, gossip; § lèmuy

lè’mu̯, v. infect, inflict;
nù mbyṳka̯d ni ndè’mug nd bùn the evil is infecting
the people;

ù ni ndè’mpg dzàṅ u nd bùn mbi’ ko̤ e?’ why do you
inflict your disease on people?
i ni ndè’ mu tsu ti he is gumbling too much; 3 ali

le’ni, v. smooth, clean, filter ;
bo le’ni ṅku̍ndòṅ boà to̤nmbàṅ they clean banana
plants and palmtrees (of dry leaves) ;
à le’ni mà̯̀n the dirt settles;

bo le ’ni ṅgwa̤d they take off the fat (that imerged
from boiling s.th. );

le’ni, v. stick, hang;

ko̤n le’ni ni mo tǎṅ i a bone stuck in his throat; § bavci
le’ni, v. become strong, substantial, heavy;
ù naṅ sûb le bo̤ swi’ni, ku nṳṅ mǎ’ yum wu’ le, à le’ni e ?
do you cook the soup so tasteless, not adding s.th.,
so that it becomes spicy? § la̤d
-li, suff. to derive causative form of the verb

sad sàli be in harmony rejoice
Iǎd l̤̯̀li be heavy ” increase

li, n. sleep; Ii i sleep overcame him csstole him);
li nť̤; yab sleep lulled them, they were lulled into
sleep; i v i he fall asleep;
li lun ni mi’ mab their eyes are heavy with sleep.

li, v. sleep; a li ny heart was asleep; fig. I
was thoughtless; I did not realize what I had done;
bi γo̤, ndi mbòṅka̤̯d go and have a good rest.

lìbǎ, n. breadth, extension, surface; § ntsilibà

lìbàkwa’ laṅ , n. desert (gravel or stone desert)

lìbàmbṳ̯̀ṅ , n. flood

libǎnò, n. frankincense

lìbàṅkwa’ laṅ, n. desert (sand desert); § an

lìbàtsi, n. salt-sea

 

 

- 161 -

lìifod, n. snake like animal (in fairy tales), spirit, witchcraft;
lìfod kòm = à y lifod, ntsa’ dzit ṅko̤̍m a magical
spirit works, thereafter the slope slides and gives
way; lifod b̤ ntoṅ ma ntsi, mbg (i ǩ̤ ṅgob mà (ṅkù’
ntoṅ bo̤ (.) when the spirit in the water speaks
aloud, the cock crows no longer; § ko̤’, mbo̤ṅlifod

lilì, n. sand fly, gnat, mosquito
lila, n. ulcer that opens by itself; § malilo̤, mâmban
ln, v. know, may, can, be able, recognize ;

i ndzi; i she recognizes his voice;

mǎ̯ ma ndh tù a ni nù yin bo̤ I do not know or
understand what you mean;

i mà to he may come;

my mà ndìn ba bo̤ I do not know at all; § adzi

lini, v. recipr. know each or one another ;

bà lini mu̯̤̍ we know eachother.
lìpo’, n. small kind of banana; often: v̇ko̤̍ndoṅ lipo’

li’, n. pl. mi’ (ta-ma), 1) eye, face; i sb li’ ti he rubs his eye;
2) opening, tap-hole (at the raphia for tapping) ;
li’ndzàṅ eye of needle; i’ ntsi spring, well;

li ṅka tap-hole; i’ sun, ball of the sun;

anus;

3) to denote single elements of mass articles ;

single root of colocasia; mik’ iba two colocasias;
li’mbṳ̍ṅ, rain drop; mi’mbo̤̍ṅ rain drops;

li’mfa, mi’mfa pearl, pearls; li’mFfa bi his pearl;

li’ mfa mysa’ si single pieces of pearls;

li’ṅg wàfṳ̯d, single grain or grains of
maize; li’ nsu, mi’ nsu single fish; also: bon li’nsu iba
two small fish; li’ ̇kun, mi’ ṅkun single beans;
li’ṅwà’ ni, mi’ṅwà’ni; single letters.

mu, n. sign, symbol;
ù bǒ̤ ntǎ’ mà yǒ̤ ma handicraft, ù yo̤ Ii ma ṅka’
γf you want to go to the handicraft center, you will
see the signboard at the entrance;
à bǒ̤ mbo̤ y, mbṳ̍ṅ to lo a, ù yo̤ li ’mù̯ ni mṳ̍̀mbà
when rain is about to fall, you will see the sign in the
clouds; § mf

li’ mu̯, v. draw, mark, known by mark

 

- (6s -
li’ m̯nù, n. prophecy , sign

lo, v. fall, drop, irrigate, come from;
ni ndo it is raining.

Lǎblǎ, n. pl. bàlǎlɑǎ contemptuous collective’ name for
fǎSàṅ, bàNgyam, bàFaila (= bàNten)

lon, n. tree sp., (big with oval shaped, leathery leaves, often
used in fence-making).

lon, v. beg, ask for ;
n’to lon γo̤ mbò ù = n’ to mà dzǎn mṳ̀ṅg wi mb ù
I shall come to you and ask for a wife; lit. I want
to borrow a ladle, part of a calabash; this is the
customary practice for wooing a wife;
ù lon ńùṅ mb (fo, ńo ti’ ’ǐ ńùṅ bo̤ ya e’? (.) you beg
for hair from the snake, where shall she take it from?
(you beg s.th. from s.o. who has nothing);
bo bini mà lon mfàn they began to ask for a king;
§ ndon, ndânlon

lob, n. sacrificial bowl on the floor in the house;
P̌ mṳ̍ kà nyṅ lob ma larṅndà i, ni nnuṳṅ ndù’ madzi, ni
nsuṅ ṅgâ, i ni mfa ndù’ mbàò ba i, i kà ku a i̇gâ, i yemti i
my grandfather arranged a sacrificial bowl on the floor
in the house, poured some palm-wine into it and said
that he was offering the wine to his father who had
died so that he should help him;
bùn sisi ka ni mbim ku bàba yàb ni yǎb bàńikòb
africans still worship (or venerate) their ancestors as
gods; § ndo̤m

lob, n. angle, fish hook

c
lɑ̌b, v. remain, stay, fall (in battle), die of;
à Ǐb miyà, i kà ku he almost died;
i Iǎb kṳ̯ndzù’ he stayed at home;
i Iǎb b̤̀d he fell in battle; i vi she died at birth;
ù Iǎb ni yò le you remain with that; § bo’̯

lobti, v. try, compare, measure, imitate ;
mg to lobti I shall try; Paulo kà ṅwà’ni yò nù,
ndobti nù bànoma m̯̌̌ Paul wrote this and used the
omans as an example.

lòṅ, n. bracelet, arm-ring of ivory ;
ndib ku̯sṳ̯ à ku̯ mbo̤ γǎṅ-lu̯ṅ ni nso làòṅ formerly
only the honourable ones wore an ivovry ring;

 

= (ṳ6i6 =

ṅguka̤d ni nso Ion ni bo n, mu̍ṅg wi ṅgṳ̯ ni nso lòṅ ni;
bà i (à kṳ̯ mbo̤ muṅg wi lṳṅ) any grown-up man wear-s
a ring; an important woman wears an ivory ring also
(a woman with a title).

lòṅ, n. uncastrated ram

loṅ, n. laziness, idleness

ľṅ, v; be idle, lounge

v. take revenge, avenge, retaliate;

ù bùdbod ke o làòṅľṅ e? are you starting a quarrel or
do you want to avenge s:th.? (This is asked, when
someone wants to bring evil on somebody who is
not conscious of any guilt); § ndoṅloòṅ, ko̤̍lòṅ, ndàm

n. a barrel
loṅloṅ tsṳṅndìba’, n. tobacco-pipe
lòṅmbà, n. sword

loṅni, v. be idle, be lazy;
yo màùn le loṅni ti this man is very lazy .

lò’, prep. since;
là’ ku̯s̯ from the beginning, since former times;
lò’ ma b̌m nǎ i from his birth;
dd̠ boka vo a: since their birth;
lò’ kwǎm (feor a long time;
màk(u̯s̯ for a very long time = fo’ màkwaǎ§m;
ni ntsu’ le from that day on;
lò’ ntsu’ ndi ò from to-day

one
lo-

om

lo’, n. pl. ndò’ gout, defect, slip, fault, infirmity ;
m’bo̤ ni lo’ ni ku à I have gout in my leg;
m’bo̤ ṅgàṅ-ľ’ , k̍ ln mà ten bo̤ I am paralyzed
and cannot run.

lo’mun, n. false accusation

pm
lo

1) come from, derive from, take, consider as;
i 1lǎ’ bà’ ma Libàvu he comes from the ead Sea;
i Iǎ’ kuṳ̯nindo̤ṅ he comes from heaven;

 

 

= (6 -

bo Iǎ’ mbo bin they came from your side;

ù Iǎ’ ya e?’ where do you come from?

bùn be Iǎ’ ma Lome these people come from Lome;
m̀ṅgwi le Iǎ’ dzṳm this woman became pregnant;

i Iǎ’ he takes measures; he takes s.th. as an example;
mà Iǎ’ tsu to have a vord to say, to advance a matter;

bi; ma ndàò’ i ni ṅkònndum bo̤ do not consider him as an
enemy; mùù ni ṅgo̤ ma (ṅgwa̤n, ľ’ ṅgwàfṳ̯d am going

to the farm to get some corn; ṅ’gǒ̤ ma ṅgwa̤n bub, n’dǎ’
ṅgwàfud I will go to the farm and get corn; § kali

1) tense marker to denote past tense (the same day),
followed by the prenas. form of the verb;

n’dǎ’ ndi mbòṅka̤d ndi o slept very well to-day;
màn, i lǎ’ mbǎṅ ṅkòd a, bo̤ wo̤ e?’ who started the
quarrel? ntsà i bǎṅ, mbi’ i Iǎ ni ṅkwa̤d mbàṅ a his
mouth is red, because he was eating oilpalm fruits;

bo Iǎ’ ṅka ni ṅgo̤ γ̌ ma koòb they have just left for
the

2) used in conditional clauses to denote past (= to
express uncertainty); the other clause being introduced
by mbǒ̤ similar to luṅ’ (followed by the prenas. form
of the verb); à ’̌’mboòṅ it would have been good;

à Iǎ’ ntsaṅ mb̌ṅ, mbo̤̍ à to Sama kosy ṙkùṅ it would
have been better, if Sama had come first;

lâ, fd ba, tumbùm a I’ṅka mè, ni nsadṅ bo̤ n mà
na̤bti bùn, mbo̤ nɑ mà tso’ kù a ndǎ bo̤ ya e? my
brothers, if I has only persisted in preaching circumcision,
why should I be persecuted ?

lo’ ni mbo, n. theft; a mà mbo̤ yan bo, a lò’ ni mbo this is no

lo’

lo’

lo’

ntsṳ̌ṅ’, v.

ntuṅ, n.

ntuṅ, v.

longer ordinary pilfering, this is downright thieving.

steal; mbo learn or practise stealing;
ù Id’ ni mbo ti you steal a lot (like a cat).

losing control (because of too much work)
disobedience, obstinacy

be disobedient, be obstinate;
mf;d i le lo’ntuṅ, ni ṅkṳ̯ ntâ’ bo̤ bd’ his brother was
disobedient and continued looking for mushrooms; § gag, tun

significance, distinctive mark, identification;

Bà’ ni mà ni ntsu’ mommoòm bo, bo ni ntsu’ lyṅ

màùn ni lo’nù the Bali do not give meaningless names,
they give a name with a distinctive meaning; § mommom

Ibǒ’ṅka, cj.

lgli, v.

lo̤m, n.

lo̤m, v.

lo̤m bùn, v.

lo̤muṳ, v.

lo̤ṅ, n.

lo̤ṅ, v.

s

otherwise, since; ’̌’ṅka to a, (ṅ’ ku dzṳ yum bo̤ since I
have come here, I have not eaten; § mb

accuse, charge with, betray, tell ; (it is not used in the

law-courts; for that purpose they use other terms,

like som̀si or puti),;

i lò’ ti a ṅgâ, m’ bo̤ yan, n’ ti bo̤ ba yan bo̤ he accused

me of being a thief, but I am surely not a thief; § somùsi
edy.

groin; i dzavn lb his groin is giving him pain; lǒ̤b mà

ntěd mbi bo̤ the groin ulcer has not yet come to a head.

burn, scalld ;
Ǐ̤’ bòa mu’ I’ ntǒn a, lo̤gli m̯̍ the weather: it was
hot and the fire increased the heat; the place was scorched.

bat, bats which are thought to have teeth ;

Iom kà w̌ṅ vu nǎ i, mbo̤̍ṅ bubdti (Pr.)

bats have hired people for the funeral of their mother,
but the rain spoiled everything. (This is said when one

iìs exposed to rain on an important occasion; or when

someone has spoiled the occasion.)

grind, pound; suffer injury;

lo̤m ṅg̤̍ṅ le grind the maize;

Foloṅ kà ľ̤m ma ntan F. has been injured in the
market; § Io’my

hide, conceal, bur;y, dig;

ma lǒ̤m nadzoṅ lie in an ambush;

b̌ mà ntǎ’ mà lǒ̤;m yin ni ṅgǒ̤’ le, à kà tso yuṳ’ a bo̤
we do not want to conceal to you the misery that
has come upon us;

mà lǒ̤m vu delay the funeral (because of a feast);
mà lǒ̤m ṅkab hide or bury money

kill people ;

bad ke dzaṅ lm bùn war or disease lay people low.
hide, escape from, save oreself;

i lo̤̍muṳ̯ mbo̤̍ṅ tamnsàn (.) he shelters from the rain at
Tamnson; § àmnsoòn

chair, throne

dangle, swing, drifting on water;

à loṅ mè yàdyàd it is swinging thus;

mboàòm à loṅ you are shaking, are weak; § loṅ muydzo̤ ni

lǒ̤ṅ ndù’ , v.

Iǒ̤ṅbubûṅ, n.

= ;
tap palmwine; §

small, very light stool of the marrow of palmribs

lòṅf̤dfǒ̤d, n. cast stool, throne

lǒ̤ṅmfòn, n.

lǒ̤ṅmi’ , n.

stool or throne of a chief or king

the big eyes at the stool; fig. megalomania;
Ǐ̤ṅmi’ ni mbubti tù yab tene eyes of the chief’ s
stool spoil them, (they behave as if they were
sitting on the throne).

ľ̤ṅmu̯dz’ ni, n. deck-chair, hammock; § loṅ

lǒ̤ṅndàm, n.

lǒṅndòṅ, n.

lo̤ṅni, v.

lo̤ṅni, v.

lǒ̤ṅntsù, n.

stool with thorns, pillory for liars on’ which they
have to sit. This is a special chair on a high place in
the palace. If s.o. tells a lie, he has to sit on that
chair and tell the truth;
ù bǒ̤ mfǎbsuṅ, bo tsi’ u ni Ǐ̤̇ndàm ṅgâ, ù su nù
mbika̯d if you tell a lie, you will be placed on a
stool with thorns, so that you will tell the truth.

stool of palmribs

swing, rinse;
à ni ndoṅni it is shaking; mà ľ̤̇ni nu’ rinse
the cup

unscrew, make loose, so that it is shaking ;

Nikòb kà tum yoò b̀l le igí, i loṅni mban mvi God

has sent this war to undermine their security;

ľ̤̇ni ndo̤ slacken the ropes, make loose;

mà mban mùn give s.o. the reins, loosen the

screws, give more freedom teo;

bo nš̤m mon ni ton, i bi ù lo̤ṅni b i they hold

the child firmly; when it cries, you loosen your grip; § k̤bù’

big mouth at the chief’ s stool; fig. megalomania;
ni mbubti tù yab being close to the chief,
spoils them

lòṅ ṅṅanìka̤d, n. high throne

loṅńàìmba’ ni, n. saddle for horses

lo̤ṅti, v.

carrying (a sick person or a corpse) by two or more persons

= (io -

ľ̤ṅtsǒ̤dsa’, n. chair or stool of judge

lǒṅtṳ, n.
lo̤ṅuṳ, v.
lg; n.
Iv
l v:
lȯ̤s V:
lo̤’ mu,

Io̤’ni, v.

Io̤’t; v:

l’o̤’ti

stool, carved of wood
evade, shirk, cheat

pumpkin; o̤’ndù’ calabash for palmwine;

lo̤’dù calabash with some wine to attract bees; § ka’dù
lo̤’ṅgwa̤d ail vessel;

lo̤’ ntsi calabash for fetching water; § ntsòn

carry (s.th. heavy by two persons) ;

ṅ’kà yγǒ̤ ma ṅgwa̤n , nsòti lo̤’ ndù’ ni baṅti, ndo’,
ṅkwe m voaernt to the farm and got calabashes
with palmwine and carried them on a bamboo pole
and returned home; § badi, beṅti

evade, keep away from, dodge a spear, adapt oneself to

the situation of s.o.; lo’ à mbi’ko̤. why do you avoid
me? maàndàzi ni ndo̤’ka̯d lo̤’ka̤d the road goes along (the
river or hill); bo lo’ mfa̤d yàb ni nù they spite

their brothers; § befvnni

dislocate, slip

do harm to s o., kill ;
mà lo’ mgṳ’̯ mùn injure s.o., step on his feet; oppress ;
ma ndo’mog̯ mbùm ù bo̤ do not harm yourself; § lonn

be late, linger, remain;

suṅ mbo i (̇gâ, i ma ndo̤’ni mà to, nti’ yab bo̤ ;
tell him he should not hesitate to come to them;
i lo̤’ ni ma wu’ kà̯̀nti sà’ he stopped there for some
time; bo bu’mbo mbso i i̇gí, i lo̤’ni boà bo mo kûnti
they begged him to stay with them for a while; § lam

display, parade in front of a chief (firing guns

along with a pantomime of war)

comfort, strengthen, calm, make happy;

mà lo̤’ti mon calm a crying child,;

b̀ṅkuṳ̯ ni ndzun ńàùm boà (̇gwad, ni nnaṅ, ni ndo̤’ ti bon
b̍ṅg wi mǔ̯̤ě̌ boà bo ndze (̇gweèn the boys buy meat
and oil and roast it and make the girls happy and flirt;
§ kelo̤’ tintṳ̯m, l̤̍muṳ̯, ntṳm

present o.s. before the chief as a kind of faithful
submission; also at funerals as a sign of faithfulness j

lum, n.

lum, adj.

lùm kěǎdzu,

= j’

to the deceased;
bo lo̤’ti ni ndikàṅ kè ni muyńi kè ni kòṅ they present
themselves accompanied by gunfire or a knife or a spear.

a period of no rain during rainy season

dry season (November - February), year, time ;

lùm ni ndzid ni ṅkwin (.) the dry season is a time
for gathering fire wood; (in the dry season it is very
cold, firewood is already there) ;

ta’ lùm a full year

battue-place, place where grass has not been burned
(for the sake of hunting) .

right side; ni bo lum = ni b’ bo lum right, to the
right, from the right;

ni bo, i lum = ni bo i, i lum to his right hand

n. good harvest year

lùmlùm, adv. also : ni lùm nì lum year by year, yearly

lù mmvi, n.

lù mndzi , n.

lùmni, v.

lùmti, v.

lun, v.

year (when independen-c);
but: lm iba two full years

famine year

be hasty, fidgety; do silly things;

yoò màùn lùmni ti, i buṅṳ, ni ṅgo̤ ma ṅgwa̤n,

ku̯̍ bo̤ ndzṳ̯ bo̤ this man is very silly, he gets
up and goes to the farm without having eaten
(he worries too much).

heat, warm up (food left over);
mà lùmti bà̤d start war again

be full, be complete;

note: that which fills is always the grammatical subject,
e.g water, wine, maize, etc.;

ndù’ lun ma lo’ the palmwine ’fills’ the calabash;
zè’ni ùkàòb lun nď Paulo Paul was full of the
oly srpirit; ṅgoòṅ nù f̤̍b;i boà nù mu̯̍màṅ me’ lun madzi
nt̤̍ u your heart is full of wickedness and iniquity ;
ndzindzimu’ lun madzi ndâ le the house of
God was filled with smoke;

ndzindzimu’ lun ma ndà-naṅ-mbaṅ, à yě, mi’ ma
ndzaṅ dzaṅ the house where palmoil fruits are boiled
ìs full of smoke, it hurts ny eyes;

luṅ, n.

lɑṅ, v.

lɑ̌ṅ, v.

laṅ (ndùṅ),

lùṅkù̯mì, n.
luṅṅkò’ , n.
fùṅu v.

luc v;

fu=:

lu’ nì, v.

lṳg, onom.

=

à lun ndànṳdàṅṳ it is almost full;
à lun it is full to the brim (with dry material) ;
à lun me pib or tsab or tsad it is absolutely full; § nduni

musical instrument., also piano

put object into a hole or hollow thing;

mà lɑ̌ṅ yumfà’ ni tṳ̯ furnish a tool with a handle;

i muṳńi nn tṳ̯ he puts a handle to the knife;

i dzàm ni t’ṳ̯ he fixes a wooden handle onto the ax;
mà 1ǒ̇ nib put the pen in the holder;

fig.: bo loṅ ndoṅńad ni tù i they put a buffalo horn

on his head , they made him feaurious.

be saved, live; i Io̤̍ vu he was saved from death.

cj, marker to denote uncertain conditional clauses, (placed
after the tense marker; followed by the prenas. form of
the verb; the other main clause being introduced by )
ù kà mmà ti Ǐ̯’fà’ e, mbo̤ a mà mbo̤ yù e?

if you had left the field, would it not have been yours?
à mbo yn, i kà y nù mbo̤̤̍ à kuni mu
mà bim tsù yin if he had done s.th. foolish, it would
have been justified to listen to you; § Iǎ’

eternal life, life without end

instrument with 6 strings, violin, guitar

save; i ni n; vu he saved him from death.

begin, do again;

ù kà lu’ fà’ le ndiko̤ e?’ when did you start this work?
lṳ̯’ lu’ mg̯̤̍ mà san it has started to become dark;

ù ku̍ m̯ ndu’ mǎ’ ṅka e?’ are you doing that again?

§ boni, bǎṅ

also: lu’ ti ṅgwàfud break off the cobs from the
maize plant

be naughty, be ill- bred, rude; § ṅgàṅlu’ ni;

fill up, fill completely;

lu’ni ndù le, a lun kwà’ mboṅkad fill something with
palmwine so that it is quite full.

small fish, tadpole, caught with a (à, a small trap

very dark, pitch dark ;

3: -
à san mè lug it is pitch dark; §

lu̯ǐ̤ṅ, n. noise, rush, roar, crackle, rumour, report ;

Iol̤ṅ mu’ crackling fire;

Ǐ̤l̤ṅ f̤f̤d rustling wind;

I̤̍i̤ṅ i tsu his fame has spread;

l̤̍l̤̇ nù le tsè mbò i the report of the matter
reached him.

lùm, n. female, maternal line;

bg bo ni l̤̀m ńin we are related maternally.

lùm, n. pl. ndù̯ùm vitch, sorcerer;
i bo̤ ndm, ni ṅkwa̤d bùn ni l̤̍m she is a
witch and is eating’’ people with witchcraft.

l̯m, n. (ta-ma) tonsgeue;
l̤̍m tu toṅni ti he does not speak properly;

l̤̍m yab their tongue, also: Ig̤̀m tab; § ntsâlṳ̯m

lṳ̌m, v. taste good, be sweet, pleasant;
i ľ̤m bn ti he pleases people a lot; § nadùmka̤d

l̀mmu’ ,, n. flame of fire
l̯mni, v. taste sweetish, disgusting, feel uneasy ;
mbùm à ni l̤̀mni, ndzo̤̍ n’ť ndzaṅdzaṅ a

I feel indisposed, as if I were to become sisck.

lù̯mu̯, v. soothe, sweeten;
i l̤̀muṳ̯ nť̤̤ yab be soothed their hearts; § Ǐ̤’ti, ntṳ̯m

lṳṅ, n. (ta-ma) name;
l̀ṅ ti koo̤ e?’ what is his name?
i kà l̤̀ṅ ti ni Petro he gave him the name Peter;
also: lo̤ṅ yin, yab, also: tin, tab;
l̍ṅ ti bo̤ ited he has three names.
luṅ, v. clean with finger (bowl, calabash, etc.), lick; § lad, lyṅti
lu̯ṅf̤t_i, n. false name
l̯ṅkòntsì, n. baptismal name

lu̯ṅl̀̇, n. name by name (being called)

l̯ṅ mommom, n. emoesty name, insignificant name, whereas
real names sicgnify s.th.; § lo’ nù

= u ==

lṳṅmbimbim, n. self chosen name, in order to avoid misuse of

lṳ̯ṅmvivi ,, n.

luyṅṅkaṅ, n.

l̯ṅti, v.

l̯ṅwòmti , n.

Luṳ’ , n
lṳ̌’ bikù, n.
lṳ

sc

m
cc

proper name

birth name, given by the father of the child or
by relatives, when the child’s head is shaved;
usually the name of an acncestor.

beer-name, given five or six weeks after birth by the
father’s sister, when the child tastes beer for the first
time; ntsu’, yn, bo kà fa lṳ̯ṅnkàṅ a a ṅgâ, e’ wala a,
bo fa n’no ntsu’ le the day I was given my
beer-name kewala, I was given beer to drink that day.

clear the plate or bowl with finger;

ù bǒ̤ ndzṳ kěǎadzo̤ ù luṅti kaṅ-nto ni; nsibo, à lan

when you eat the food, you clean out the sauce in the
bowl with your finger, so that it is clean; § ko, lyṅ

name of honour

place, region; part of body, joints; weather ;

l’ the place is gently rising;

l̤’ γo̤’ṅni the place is getting bigger;

ľ̤’ ni ndzoṅni it is noisy;

l̤’ fo mè ko̤m = I̤’ ť̤’ mè poṅ it is stockstill;

d̤’ ni mvaṅ vàṅ = I’ tso̤’ti it is confused, full of unrest
l̤’ ni ṅka̤ti it dawns;

d̤’kà̤ni mṳ̍ it is already becoming dusky;

l̤’ ka ni mvilivilnǐ it is still dusky ;

ľ̤’ to’ it dawns, when the morning wind
starts and the pigs start grunting (about s o cclock)
l’ lan it is bright; l’ sa̤n it is dark, gloomy ;
l’ vù’uṳ̯ it is gloony, dusky; l’ sǎd it is serene;
d u; . l

ta san me t-so§ṅ it is terribly dark ;

’

in compounds always with rising tone;
mǒ’ 1̤̌ mbùm à a part of my body ; § en, mbà, mbùm

n, ?

1’ mbàṅ

thigh

’bò’ tiìbò’ ti, n. valley, plain

costòm, n. custom

n. place where an oath is taken, where one curses

oneself in case of not telling the truth. almost every

(’: -

tribe or village has such a place; often in a cave or at
the foot of a special tree;

mbi Sama kà vo̤, bo yǒ̤ ndzm ma (gi matsṳ̤̀ṅni mbad
Fòmugńam, mbi’ à kà uyṅa ndž̤ mbi le. uyṅa suṅ
ṅgâ, i mà nd mbi’ yoò ň mbi bo̤; i bǒ̤ mfǎbsuṅ, ṅgi

le we i; i bi’ni mà dzaṅkad . ṅgi bo̤ m̌’ fù mbuṳkad,
bo tsi’ mà Ǐ̤’ a the sheep of Sama were
lost; they went to the place where an oath is taken
to the fetish at the foot of the hill of Fomu̯nam,
because had stolen the sheep. urna said that he
did not know anything about this sheep affair; if he
were to tell a lie, the charm should hold him; so that
he would become sick.

ṅgn’’ bo̤ mǒ’ fù mbuṳ̯kad , bo tsi’ mà ľ̤’ ndzɑ’mnù

a ṅgn is an evil charm which is arranged at the place
where an oath is taken.

lṳ̌’ fà’ ntsibàṅ, n. field of blood

’fo̤tì, n. place of rest

m
tc

’ k̯tinikòb, n. place of sacrifice (for gods, spirits)

cc

lṳ̌’ mu’, n. fireside; mfo̤’ bǒ̤’ ṅko mùn, i γǒ̤ manṅko̤ṅ ľ̤’mu ,
mbi’ni mà dzo̤’ mu’ when someone feels cold, he

goes to the fireside and starts to warm himself;

lṳ̌’ndanì , n. place of glory ;

1̤̌’ndza̤̯m place of darkness;

l̤’ndzo̤’ni slope, slightly rising slope;

ľ̤̌’nontsi drinking place, place of rest;

m
a b;

’noòṅ living or sleeping room;

ľ̤’ntsi well, water site;

Ǐ̤’ṅko̤̍ṅniko̤̍ṅ̍ni steep slope;

ľ̤’ńu’ mbàṅ place where oilfruits are pressed or stamped;
Ǐ̤’ńǐ’ ndù’ winepress;

m
;

’tntòb bog, marsh, swamp:

bou
:

tsà’ ti kàòb place of worship, prayer;

m
s

’tsi living, sitting room;

shady place;

ľ̤’ tufom place of libation; à bo̤ ma ndà bàwukad,

bo ṅkati ni ndù’ boà kědzṳ mbo̤ ṅgwa̤d; tufom bo̤

yǎb bàńikoòb; lob bo̤ m̌’ yǎb bàńiìkòb; bo ni ntsi lob ma
ndab, kwà’ ma(ṅk̇ mu’, ni nnuyṅ ndù’ madz bo kà bi ’ni
nnuyṅ bo̤ ṅgo̤̍, le bo̤ lob ttMlae place of libation is in the
house of the grown-ups, older people; they offer wine
and food and oil; tufom are their gods (ancestors) ;

lob is another one of their gods: they place it in the

= 6:

house right by the fire and pour palmwine into the bowl
after having lined it with grass ; this is called Iob;

1̯̌ tuvu place of wailing, of mourning;

1̤̌’vu place of death, where s.o. has died.

k
c
p
lo
o
i
f=1

; n. place of execution;;

a ma tu mbad Fomuyńam wu’, bo ndab i, bo ńo’ mù
mbyṳkad ni mfo̤̍ndzàm on top of the hill Fomu̯ńàm
the criminal is beaten and killed with the handle of
an ax.

, v. also: du’ ̯ù̀p waft (of smoke); ndzindzimu’ ni ndy’u̯
ma ndab there is smoke in the house.

sc

’ wo mbombom ,, n. place paved with stones

 

