M

=3: -

m-, pref. sg. cl. I, pl. b- cl. 2 1) only for two nouns: mon human

being; mon child; ?) pref. pl. cl. 6 of cl. S: mi’ eyes;

3) prenas. variant (before labial consonants) of class
prefixes, derivated (deverbal) nouns and adjectives as well
as of verbal stems.

̤̌) prenas. varriant (before labial consonants) of p. 1.sg. my

mà , infinitive marker (citation form of the verb), precedes the verb,

ma ... bo̤

but may be dropped;

i bim (mà) tso ma ndab hae asgrees to enter the house;
mà tsam pity, have mercy;

also: nuɑ̌û̌ mà sam bùn with regard to having mercy
on people.

neg. particle with imperative (bo̤ follows at the end
of the neg. phrase)
ma mbim nàù le boo̤ co nct agree to this.

mother (in connection with the name of the child) ;
mà Sama mother of Sama; note: n Sama;

note: mà mon mother of the child;

ma bàb their mother;

ma yàb their mother; § boǎmmà

neg. paricle (always after the subject and with bo at
the end of the neg. phrase)
a mà mb̌ṅ bo̤ it is not good;

elder sister; ma m ny elder sister;

but: mama ù your elder sister;

mama i his elder s.; mama bo our (incl.) elder sister;
mama y’ our (excl.) elder sister;

mama yin your elder sister (pl) ;

mama yàb teonhaeir elder sister;

bàmama, pl. elder sisters.

ma, p. poss. l. sg. cl. 116 his, her, its

1) maternity, mother;

mâ kuńàùàm sow; míâṅgob hen;
mâṅg̤̤dbùn mother of nations;
mâyγǎṅgwèn mother of all the lascivious;
2) something big, great, important ;
mândíââṙg’ṳ̯ a big house ;

mândikàṅ a big gun, canon; also: umbrella; if a noun

= ;:

has already been mentioned, it is not repeated;
e.g. à mâ ṅgy it is big;

3) adv. very;

ni’ very early, still night;

ni mâmb’ mbà’ very early in the morning;

1ǎ’ mâkwǎm since ancient times;

i mâmandzà̯m he is far behind;

i mâkyṳsuṳ̯ he is far ahead.

ma, prp. in, on, at, from, to;
i ma ndab he is in the house;
tsi masi sit down; i kà kwe he came

back from the coast.

mab), v = stuff (with food); bo: mao̍ kèdzuṳ̯ ni; ntsu yab they
stuff their mouths with food.

mab, p. poss. 3. pl. cl. 16 their
mabolo, n. also: mu̯̍bòlo kind of sausage, made from cassava

mâbon, n. also: mâtàbon mother of all children (honorary
name)

màd, n. image, form, kind, shape; § nd

madù, n. pl. bàmadù mother of husband, mother-in-law of
wife; madu à my mother-in-law

madzi, prp. in, inside of; ba’ madzi the inside

madzàò’, prp. among, between; madzoò’ among us:; § dzo’

magalà’, n. (Mṳ̍bako’) neck; the neck is mine, (said by the helper
when the animal has been caught) ; § koti

’

mǎyàb , n. pl. bàmàγàb paramour, prostitute, wench;
§ nɑ̌màγàab, nɑěbàmàyàb, sàkṳ̤

mǎγàbndab, n. acquired mǎyàb by permission of husband;
à kà bo mùn bǒ̤ mfuṅ ṅgwi mùn ni màyγàb,
i yè ṅgâ, ndu mu̍ṅgwi le lin; ndu mu̍ṅgwi le bǒ̤ nd̤h,
bo nti’ mfuṅ mùn le ni màγàbndab formerly, when
somebody called the wife of someone a paramour,
he thus brought it to the knowledge of her husband;
when he knewv of it; that person was then called the
paramour of the house.

mǎyaṅṅgwèn, n. mother of all unchaste

 

= (( =

mâkòb, n. climbers with large thorns and reddish flowers;
tip of leaf is used as medicine against ulcers

mâkòb, n. forest, wood
mâkuńàm, n. sow
mâku’, n. tap root of colocasia from which new roots spread

mǎku̯sṳ, adv. far in front, ahead ; i mǎku̯sṳ̯ he is far ahead;
à kà bo̤ màǎkuṳsṳ̯ it was in the very beginning.

mǎlà̯m, n. nirror, window ;
mǎlà̯m ndani clear, lucid glass

màla’, n. grass sp.;
a ṅgò, ), ṅgùmba ni ṅgabti mb biìmo’ bùn a it is a
kind of grass which the Ngumba distributes among
certain people.

màli, n. pole beans (big and broad, black when dry).

mâlilù̯, n. ulcer appearing on the knee; large blisters on skin,
which open by themselves; § lil

mam, v. t-ěry s.th. big, s.th. too difficult ;
i mam yum nda̯dka̯d he picks up s.th. very heavy
with great effort;

mà mam yum do s.th. which is below one’s
ability; § fàbt;

mama, n. other (Pidgin)

maāmà , n. alder sister; mamà a my elder sister;
u ma mo you are no elder sister; mamà Moses
Moses’ elder sister

màmàya’ , adv. far away

màmandza̯m, adv. far behind

mâmban, n. ulcer; mâmbam màù b̌ṅ mà to’ (Pr.) it is
nice to lance another man’s ulcer, (it is easy to
judge others, it does not cause me pain) ; § io

mâmbi, n. mother goat ;

mâmbi ni mbi bṳ̯n mon when the mother-
goat grows old, it sucks the udder of its young one.

= 1; =

mâmfu’mvi, n. early morning (when the white mist is laying in the
valleys) .

mamnì v. make a great effort;
bo kà fa’ni titi, mmamni ṅkòd they struggled
and remained strong; § fàṅni, mam

maāmon, n,. pl. mâbon children’ s mother; § tàmomn

mamti, v. snatch up; i ni mmamti kè he snatches up things
which do not belong to him.

mâmuys̯̀ṅ , n. pl. màbu̯sṳ̀ṅ, mother bird
màn , n. mother (abusive)

mândab, n. upper and lower palmrib of housewall parallel to
which the ṡkoǒṅndab are placed in a vertical position.

mândarṅgṳ, n. big house, palace
mandàd, n. war dance of the Bali

mandèd, n. instrument used as flute at funerals and other
dances.

mândikàṅ, n. big gun, cannon, umbrella

mandàùn, prp. above, upon, on; mamndùn a upon me;
mandàùn yin upon you; § kg’ndùn, ndùn

mandun, n. anvil; bo ton ma mu’, à bàṅ, bo tu’ mṳ̍, nnò’
ni mandun, ndǎ’ ndàùn, ntsi tgn, à ti’ muyńi
they heat iron in the fire untill it becomes red; then
they take it out and put it on the anvil, take a sledge-
hammer and feorge it into a knife;

n

bàtà yab kà tsi muyńi à ni mandun iṅgâ, mg mbu’

ndo̤ṅ m̤̌ the fathers of ab put my knife on the
anvil so that I could make holes into the bamboo pole;
§ ndǐnlàm

mandz̯̀m, prp. behind, later, afterwards ;
mandz̯̀m ma̯̍̀ behind me; bon mandz;̤̀m people
arriving later; mandz̤̯̀m ntsb̌’ ṅgòṅ outside the
towngate; à la’ mbo̤ mandz̤̯̀m, bo ku’ mfupn i
later, they called him again,

mandzà̀n, prep. beyonda (a valley, river), on the other side

 

- 11 -
màndzi, n. road, way, path; mode, kind;

i γ̤̌ màndzi dzum hae disappeared ;
màndzi ò le ku m̯̤̍ teohis road is no longer in use;

N

màndzi ò le ka ni nda this road is still used;
i γǒ̤ mu̯̤̍ màndzi sisà he went far;’ § mbobmaàndizi,
nta’ màndzi, ta’ti màndzi, γya’ ti.
màndzì babti, n. level, wide road
màndzì mù̯màṅ, n. secret path; cunning way;
màndzi ntuṅtuṅ rough road, not rolled;
màndzi ntsinikad straight road;
màndzi vumùn man at death’s door; maàndzi vu ni nd̯m
i i̯’m man aeccepts death, he is enduring.

mandzì γàm, n. coad to Gam (illage of Bali)

mandzòṅ, n. age group; military group; bi yeti Ba awe ndâ
mandzàrṅ bi me’ praise Vaweh all his hosts.

Mandzu’ suṅbo̤ proper name, meaning: do not listen to reports.

maânta, adj. tcoo long, big, tall ;
yò mùn kwà’ mânta i mè this man is excessively tall.

mântèd , n. also: no profit, no interest;
opposite: ndz̤̯̀àmntan interest, profit; Sama kà fin
coffee, ndzuṳṳ̯ ndz̤̀mntan nazamṳ̯. Sama has sold
coffee and has made a lot of profit.

mântsù , prp. out, outside the door

mântùntɑ̌’ bùn, n. big crowd of people

mânù, n. pl. mâke important matter, thing

mâṅgab , n. pl. bàmaṅgob breeding hen

mâṅgob, n. greeting of respect to a woman

mǎṅna, n. also: tǎṅgwi; 1) sister in-law (sister of husband) ,
because the wife often calls the husband Ba’;
2) aunt (sister of the father)

màṅndzǎd, n. ring-worm

màṅni, v. be zealous, be eager; quarrel;

mǎṅni, n. jealousy, ambition

bo ni mmaṅ̇ni tsu they dispute;

mà màṅni vrestle;

dzu’ bon Fonď̤ ṅko̤ mu’, mbi’ màṅni the yam of
the children of Fondǒ̤ is burned in the fire, because

of a silly ambition (each one felt too proud to look
after it ). g

maṅko̤ṅ, prp. beside, nearby, towards;
maṅko̤ṅ le bà’ bà’ on both banks of the river; § ṙkoṅ

Mâṅkwi’mùn, also: Maâṅkwi’ṅgùòṅ god’s wife (of the Bamu̯ńam):

she declared ntsu’ ntumṅgwa̤ n and ntsu’ ṅko’ ntan
as a holiday.

mânsu, n. also: ndà̯mntsi water snake
mâńàm, n. pl. bànǎńam mother animal

màńi, n. pl. bàmǎń̇i mother of twins;

bàùn ni ṅgomti bàmǎńi people honour mothers of twins.
masi, prp. down, on the ground ; § nsi
masindzà, n. pl. bàmasindzà messenger; court servants
mas(ṳ̯̀, prp. in front of, at the foot of
maso̍ṅ , n. machine, esp. sewing machine
mâtàbon, n. also: mâbon mother of all children (honourary name)

matses, n. matches
matsṳ̀ṅnɑ, prp. coast; below, down, under

màtàùṅ, n. plant used for ear ache; it is heated over the fire,

pressed and then the juice is poured into the ear
or drunk.

matàùrṅ, n. pl. mantùṅ inside of ear

mǎ , v. throw, cast, put on;
mǎ’ ndam cast a net; mǎ’ ob angle, fish ;
mǎ’ ba̤d go to war, throw spears;
mǎ’ bo give a hand with work; also lay a hand on
the paining shoulder;
mǎ’ kě mfòn pay, the set tribute to the chief;
mǎ’ kǎb mùn imitate, ape;
mǎ’ kù valsk in long strides;

 

n

mǎ’ làd make a great effort, tackle, scramble for;
come to grips with;

mǎ’ mbob ni; mi’ bùn throw dust’ (magic) in people’ s
eye, bewitch s.o., so that he cannot see clearly;
bàyan kà to, mmǎ’ mbòb ni mi’ Pǎfòmtsam fòntsam;
bo kě bi, i ti yo̤ yab bo tohieves came and threw
dust into the eyes of o; his eyes grew dim; they
stole his things, but he did not see them;

mbob bo̤ m̌’ fù, bo nebti ni mǎ’ mbom (go; i bǒ̤ nš̤m
ni; b i, ù ti yo yan bo ’mbòb’ is some kind of
medicine, they prepare it with a certain herb; if a
thief holds it in the palm of his hand, you cannot
see the thief;

mǎ’ mf̤̀ ni mi’ bùn throw blindness in a person’ s
eye = outwit, cheat, e.g. in trade;

mǎ’ míostàṅ fix small ceiling within the walls;

mǎ’ ndzi pot on a large robe;

mǎ’ ni bad war against;

mǎ’ ni nts ndikàṅ shoot at s .o. or

bo mà’ i ni ndikàṅ ikwà, nsam they fired at it
four times and failed ;

mǎ’ nsi = boli ntsa’ appease the land when s.o. has
no luck with his field or if a piece of land changes
hands, then the buyer, after having paid the sum,

has to bring a certain sacrifice ’mà mǎ’nsi mṳ̌’

in the presence of the seller and the neighbours ;

bo mà Ǐ’ ndù’ boà ṅk̤̍ti ńikòb ma Io̤’ ṅgâ,
ntsa’ le fa kědzṳ̯ mbodṅka̤d they may take palmwine
and food and make a sacrifice to God at the place,
so that the earth may bring forth a good crop;

màǎ’ ntsiba̤̯d sing a war sonsg;

mǎ’ ṅgàm mb mmùn make an important admonition
in form of a simile; §

màǎ’ (ṅgṳ̍ṅ, sow guinea corn;

mǎ’ ṅgwa’ share common money as a loan without.
interest; § v(̇g wa’

mǎ’ ṅkab offer money, share common money, gather m.;
mǎ’ ṅkwaàn own a slave;

mǎ’ ńùm keep animals ;

mǎ’ tǎṅndab fix the ceiling of the house ;

mǎ’ tàṅṅgṳ fix the main ceiling resting on the walls ;
màǎ’ yadàla pnout on a long gown.

ma’’ni ntsu, n. dispute

mà’ ti, v. wait, let go, leave s.th. somewhere, allow;
mà ti, ṅ’gǒ̤ malit, Ill go. allow me to go.

m̌n, n dirt, mud, filth ;

- 161 -
mn ni ndzi ù, ndum your dress is full of dirt;
ṅ’ko̤sṳ̯, ntu’ màn (Pr.) in spite of being first,
I only drew dirty water; the first become the last.

m̤̌n, v be or become dirty

m̤̌n, v press (puss from wounds);

i m̤̌m mban hae presses a pustule.

im̯̀ni, v spot, stain, pollute;

bo ni mmà̀nmi ntsi they pollute the water.
mà̀nka̯d ndzi dirty dress; § tsà’ kaad ndzi
manm̤̌n, adj. dirty
mbà, n. measure, limit, measured piece of land;

n’dza̤d muṳ̤̌̍, ndza’mbà am surfeited, have had

too much;

ù kwǎ’ fa’. ndza’mbà you have worked too much,

you have overstepped the limit;

à b̌ǎ̌ṅ mu̯, ndza’ mbà ttis excellent;

ṅgṳ̯m le dzam, ndza’ mbà teohere are too many locusts.
§ mbàni, ndèù§̤, I’

mba, n. madness, insanity ;
i vɑ mba hae became maentally ill.

mba, n. pl. bàmba lunatic, madman: j ba, ṅgàṅmba
mba, n. my friend, comrade (in an address)

mbab, n. pl. of bab vwings

mbab, n. rat, mouse; § Pffù, ko̤̍nànmbàb, mytà, tsèkù
mbabndab, n. khouse-rat (edible)

mbǎbndùn, n. big edible field rat

mbad, n. hill, mountain; mà ko’ mbad go uphill;
mà sw mbad cescend.

mbad, adv. probably, perhaps
mbadla, adj. probably, possibly ;

àle bo bo’ ṅgâ, mbadla by to (̇kɑ̤ě̌’m ni; lan wò
they are afraid, we might possibly hit a rock.

-
mbadndabli, adj. hilly
mbadndàlì, n. mountain ridge, mountain chain

mbadndz;̯̀m, n. follower, younger brother;
mbadndzà̯m mfòàn younsger brother of the chief;
mfàn teoae one vbo follows or
accompanies the chief.

mbadtì mfàòn, n. stool carrier (of the chief)
mbadtṳûnṅg wà̯d, n. the maount of olives
mbàgàlùm , n. dancing club of Banyaṅgi

mbàlàrṅ, n. alarm, cry for help, yell;
mbàlàṅ, fa mùn ò’ help, send someone

mbàm, n. snake sp. (black, poisonous, as thick as an arm)
mbambàm, n. one vwfho cares for the child
mbammbàm, adj. narrow

mbǎn, n. enemy, hater; mbǎn ù your enemy;
ko̤ a mbò mbǎn a save me from my enemy.

mban, n. open sore, wound ;
mban tsi’ ntsù i teoae asbcess has a head;
mban to kwǎ̤m teohae abcess remains hard.

mban, n. fastener, screw, rampart;
Ṅkòb kà tum yò b̀d le ṅgâ, i loṅ̍ni mban mvi
God sent this war to undermine the security.

mbànì, n. encampment, camp,;
mandz̯̀m mbàni outside the camp; § mbà

mbàntiì, n. tree sp., used as jamb in house-building; used for
planks; § baànti

mbǎṅ, n. fuit of oilpalm, stone of that fruit;
ù sam mbàṅ, nsam ctsitsa’ (Pr.) you loose both,
because you want two things at a time;
(you send s.o. to go and get money or cloth in the
market, when he arrives, s.o. else has already taken
it; tsintsa’ (waste matter of palm kernel);
§ mbǎṅkòn kidneys; m bǎ̇li’ sun; mbǎṅmbavṅ tuberous;
mb ǎṅntsàm testicles; heart; mbǎṅ mùn embryo

- I1s6 -
mbaṅ, n. (à-ma) pot; mbarn à my pot; mbàṅ ma ny pots.
mbǎṅ mb̯̀, n. foetus; i kà tum mb ǎṅmùn she had a miscarriage.
mbaṅbaṅ, n. relish, farm vegetables;
b̤̀̍ kà kab mbaṅbaṅ ma fà’ niṅkù’, nnaṅ, ndzṳ ṅgo̤n m̯̌
yesterday we collected vegetables from the farm and
cooked them and ate them with fufu.
mbaṅb̤̯̀d, n. declarer of war; § baṅ, bi’ ni, bǐ̌d

mbàṅgom, n. tree sp. (used as firewood and for carving drums) ; § ṡkaà’

mbǎṅli’, n. pl. mbǎṅmni’ (ta-ma) eyeball ;
bo la’ ta̤mni mb̌̇ni’ they will meet again; § mb

mbǎṅmbàṅ, adj. tuberous, lumpy ;

tsu’ vǐ̤ mbǎṅmbàṅ the pap becomes lumpy; § mbṅ
mbaâṅndù’, n. small palmwine pot; § càdndùì’
mbaâṅntò, n. vegetable pot
mbǎṅntsàm, n. testicles; § ntsàm, mbṅ
mbaṅntsà’, n. earthen pot
mbǎṅntṳm, n. heart muscle; mbǎṅṅkù foot muscle; § mb̌ṅ, ntṳ̯m
mbǎṅṅkòn, n. (a-ma) kidneys ; § mban
mbati, n. thousgnht, idea; § bati

mbatì mfàòn, n. also: mbadti mfòn the one who carries the
chief ’ s stool

mbàtsà’, n. double rattle with handle, used at dances;
§ eš̤’, ntsǐ’ntsà’

mbà’ , n. button; jsigwi à nyṅ mbà’ ni ndzi à, i mmǎ’ m’
my wife fixed buttons on my gown, my overcoat.

mba’ , n. as e .g. mba’ muyńi sheath of knife or sword;
sd lòṅmbà u ma mbà’ i sheath your sword.

mbǎ’ mbà’, n. morning ;

mbâ’ bàm, n. pl. γǎṅbâ’ bàm weavers of bags; mbâ’keè, yγ̇ba’ kà
mat weaver; mb’ ṅki’, γǎṅba’ ṅknû’ basket weaver

=
n; mb̌’mbà’ ni mfyń̇ùm in the morning, at night
mba’ n, n. weaving work

mba’ ntsi, n. wave; mba’ ntsi oò ti these waves are very
strong; mba’ntsibà ocean waves

mba’ tsèn, n. centre of forehead (seat of beauty and majesty)
mbâ’ tu, n. pl. γǎṅba’ tu plaitor of hair

mbad, n. excrement, sediments, grounds

mba(dṅkàṅ n. sediment in beer (which is drunk); § ṅkaṅ
mba̤dńàm , n. excrement of animal

mb;n, n. sheaf, bundle, truss

mbanndṳ̯̀, n. bundle of young palmribs (tying material)
mbà̤nnd̀ṅ, n. bundle of palmribs (raffia)

mba̤nvin, n. bundle of fine roofing grass

mbebmbi, n. pl. γǎṅbebmbi shepherd

mbèn, n. (a-ma) wall, side, slope; § (̇gàn

mbènmbad, n. mountain slope

mbènndab, n. house wall; mbènndâ yàb their house wall
mbènti, n. pl. bSmbènti the neighbour; §
n. stone wall

mbètibèti, adj. pointed, sharp

mbetika(d , adj. pointed like a pyramid

mbi, n. liver; § bi

mbi, v. (Bameta): go ahead (with ntsa preceding) ;
kud ntsàmbi ndž̤m ke’ ti () the work

=

progressed at first, but failed later.
mbi, n. pl. bàmbi goat

mbi , cj. marker to denote temporal clauses:

when, as, whereas, whenever, neg. never; § bi
mbib, n. stripe, bruise, swelling;
ṅkoṅfṳn ta a, mbib tum a wasp has stung me,
it has swollen.
mbibi, adj. changed; § bi
mbiìbṅgwàn, n. (a-ma) wounds (from a whip); § ṡgwàn

mbifà’ , n. planter of field, farmer; § o

mbika̯d , adj. true, faithful; done, ready (the meal);
bùn mbika̯d faithful people.

mbikoaṅ, adv. for ever

mbikg, n. pride; mbiko̤ ṅko̤sṳ̤ nù’, ’mundziko̤’ bo̤ nnǎndzà̯m nù
pride goes before a fall (after selfreliant action follows
bitter experience).

mbimbodkà̯̀’d, n. (a-ma) lungs; § ntg̯ voùγo̤vùγò̤

mbimbàù ’, n. shiny white cloth

mbimàùn, n. human liver
mbimbin, n. small biting ants sp. (found in forest)
mbin, n. cockroach; i fo ndzǒ̤ mbin he is as weak as a cockroach.

mbiìntù̯nka̤d , n. also: mbimùn, mbińùm (a-ma) lier;

mbiìntu̯’vu, n. ’death goat’’; the goat given by a counsellor to
the Ngumba club before his death.

mbiṅkà’vu, n. the goat to be given by the children of the
counsellor upon his death to the dquarter heads,
or money as compensation.

mbiṅkù’, n. ram (young one)

mbiṅkṳ̀ndàòṅ, n. pl. γǎṅbìṅkṳ̀ndòṅ banana planter; young
banana plant.

 

mbirńàm, n.

mbińàm, n.
mbisiṅ, n.
mbitiì, n.
mbitsà’ . n.

mbivù, n.

mbìyaṅ, n.

mbi’, cj.

mbi’ ko e,

=

small kind of fox sp., (black in colour, it steals
partridges).

animal liver
also : mbìsuṅ hunchback
rash, rash on head

also: mbiì’ tsò’ baboon

funeral goat, brought by the children of a counsellor
after his death, for the so that they
can bury the deceased.

groundnut or peanut (arachis hypocaea); § γǎm

because, for, for the sake of, in order to;

1) with following noun or pronoun: mbi’ m for my sake:
mbi’ bṳ̍’ for our sake (cexcl.) ;

mbi’ wàù feor your sake (sg.) ;

mbi’ bò (tor our sake (incl.);

mbi’ yi (for his sake;

mbi’ bin (for your sake (pl.);

mbi’ wo̤ because of whom;

mbi’ bo (or their sake;

dzu’ bon fǎ kà k̯ mu’ mbi’ màṅni the yam

of the chief s children burned because of

their jealousy;

bo mbom tsà’ mbi’ mà bom ndab mṳ̯, they make
bricks (of clay) to build a house;

dzi’ ti lâ, mbi’ ù vù be careful, otherwise you will
fall; I yâ ’, mbi’ mà tǎà mvɑ̌ masi pass here , so

that you do not slip or fall;

2) cj. introducing causative clauses (with clause- final a)
l̤’ tǎn ndiò ti, mbi’ ńùm ni nta titin a it is very

hot today, because the sun is shining too much.

p.interr. why ; lit. because of whact?

i kà ńd’ i bub, mbi’ko̤ e?’ why did he kill him like that?
ù yed mbi ’ko̤ e?’ why are you astonished ?

bi kà màṅgyèmti i bo̤, mbi’ ko e?’ why did you not

help him?

mbi’ndzǒ̤̍, cj. because, as;

n’ dà’ ni mg̯̍ màlàm mi’, mbi’ndzo̤ n’ dǎ’ ni ntenni mà
to yγâ’ a 1 forgot my glasses,.as I was coming and
hurried to get here.

- go -

mbì’nì, n. beginning; mbi ni; nù beginning of s.th.;

fa mbi ni nù mboò mṳ̍ make a beginning for me.

mbi’ṅgâ ,, cj. because; n’ dǎ’ ni ndo̤’ni mà to yâ’, mbi’ ṅgâ, fà’
lǎ’ mfed a a took a long time in getting here
because my work held me up.

mbò, prop. at, to, from, nearby, beside, with;
mb mṳ̀ to me; mbà ù to you; mmboo i to him,;
mb bṳ̤̍’ to us (excl.); mbo bin to you (pl.) ;
mb bo to them;
fa ṅwà’ni le mbò ma̯̍ give me that book;
y ṅwà’ni ka mbo mà̯̍ your book is still with me;
but: i ka maṅko̤ṅ ba i hae is still with his: father;
γǒ la, nti’ mfa̤d ù go to your brother.

mbo, n. pl. of bo (a-ma) hands, arms

mbolì, n. medicine for pregnant women to avoid a miscarriage ;
mboli bo̤ m̌ǎ’ fù, mboòm ṅgò̤, bo ni ńu’ ni; ndù’
mfa mb wi, i mà ndǎ’ dzṳ̯m nindo̤ bo̤ a, ko i
bǒ̤ ndǎ’ dzṳ̯m, mon tǎ’ mà tobni i ma boòm i, bo fa
mboli ṅgâ, mon tsi mboṅka̤d ntse ni ndib, i to vi a
”Mboli’ is a kind of medicine or some kind of herb
which they pulverize with palmwine and give to a
woman, so that she does not become pregnant too
quickly, or if she has already become pregnant., this
medicine is given so that the child does not trouble
her, but behaves well right up to the time of the birth.
(mboli is a red plant which grows like a willow).

mbom, n. kind, sort;
bi ni ndzy ila’ mboâm keâdzṳ̯ e?’ pnhat sort of food
do you eat? § ndà, màd, ṅgèni, mbommbom

mbàòmbi, n. cola fruit with husk (five nuts are in one husk)

mbòmbo, adj. empty-handed ;
i tum yàb mbòmbo he sent them emp̤ty-handed,
without a letter or anything else;
i kà to mboòmbo, (̇gǒ̤ mbòmbo he arrived with empty
hands and left the same way;
ù kwe ma (ṅgwa̤n mboòmbo e? are you returning from
the field with empty hands? :

mbombo , adv. hand to hand;
Samuel kà yàbti Bible me’ mbombo S . has distributed
all the Bibles and gave one into each (teacher’s) hand;
ľṅ mbàmbo each one holding a harp.

 

on ==
mbombom, adj. heaped or piled up on s.th.
mbomlàm, n. qguiver for small sticks with bird-lime
mbommbom, adj. formed ; mbaṅ mbommbom formed pot

mbommbom, adj. various, different kind of;
nù mbommbòm various big things, deeds

mbâmmùn , n. creator of man, God;
mbommàù msòṅ bo̤ ta’ ńin the creator of a man with
teeth is only one (Pr.). (all men have the same creator.)

mbomnì. n. (a -ma) (fteorm, structure
mbotiì, n. pleat, fold; § boti, bo

mbot(ù̯, n. pl. of bot̯’̀ branches

mbòb, n. ttreace, tract (of man and animal)

mbàòb, n. medicine against unfavourable judgment;
le mǎ’ mbob ni mi’ yàṅtsǒ̤dsa’ this man
bewitched the judge, so that he could no longer
clearly understand.

mbob, n. aust, powder; but: f̌ndikàṅ gun powder

mbàòbfṳ̯fu̯d, n. head wind;;
bo bo̤ ni mboòbf̤f̤d they had the wind against them.

mbò̌̌bkù, n. pl. mb̌̌bṅkù (a-ma) feoo-tprint (of man or other);
bofà màn ti peti tso̤̍ṅni sa’, i ni ntso̤ěûd a bo, kù tso’
mb̌bṅkù mi sǎ bo̤ nam cannot investigate a matter
in dispute, unless he follows the footprints;
mà tso’ mbǎbṅkù ńùm track an animal;
mà tso’ mb̌bṅkù esu follow jesus

mbòblibòbli, adj. lukewarm; § bobli
mbòbmǎndzì, n. narrow path, track; bou̯̍wi ni ndzid ni; mbòbmǎndz;i,
ni ṅgǒ̤ ma ṅgwa̤̯ the womaen are taking the path

going towards the farm.

mboɑ̌̌bmbòb, adj. unclear, unsharp ;
i ni ndzo̤ni mbobmbob hae coes not see clearly.

mbobndàb, n. cotton

 

- (g; -
mbobntsa’, n. dust; f̤fò̤d mbobntsa’ the wind raises dust.

mbobṅkṳ̀, n. cotton; bo kà ba’ yò ndzi ni they have
woven this cloth with cotton wool; § ṡkṳ̤

mbobsugà, n. powder sugar

mbobtuṳ̯, n. sawdust, worm diust; § ṡko’, nit
mbod, adj. young, immature

mbodbòm, n. lower, soft part of belly”

mbodka̯d , adj. soft, weak ;
tòbti ntòn le mbodka̤d stir that pap soft.

mbàdu, n. instrument of the Ngumba club
Mbololo’ also : Mbolo Bororo , nomadic Fulani

mb̌̌mtita’, n. small ants sp. (similar to mygfù’mboòm) that dig
small holes into the ground; their bite is very painful.

mbǒ̌mtṳm, n. opinion, idea, view

mbonika̯d , adj. peaceful, peace-loving, happy ;
mg ti ntsu mbonika̯d am speaking softly.

mbàṅgṳ̌, n. also: bòṅgò̤ or bòṅgṳ tree sp.
mbàṅka̤d , adj. good, beautiful; ;
i kǎ ndze nù mboṅka̤d ndzamuṳ he used to do a

lot of good; § b̌̇

mbòṅtu, n. lucky person; yoò bo̤ mboṅtu this person
is lucky.

mbońìm, n. evening; ni mbońùm in the evening; § bad, ńù’m
mbotika̯̤d , adj. soft, low-voiced, gentlle

mbo’, n. pop of peanuts (roasted, ground and cooked); § bo’
mbò’mbàb , n. pl. bàmbò’mbàb guinea pig

mbo’ti, adj. flat; tsǒ̤’ tu mbo’ti a flat hat; § babci

mbo̤, tense marker to denote preterite and simultaneous action in
the past; § bo̤

- o3 -

mboo, cj. and, (connecting nouns) ;
ba mṳ̀ mbo̤ mfa̤dà he is ny father (head of the family)
and my brother (real or related) ; § mfod

mb, cj. and, then (following conditional clauses) ;
à kà (loṅ mbǎṅ) bǎṅ, mbo̤̍ ù kà fà (ńkab a mb i it
would have been better, if you had given him my money;
i kà mbim ntsù a, mb̤̤̍ ṅgo̤’ le kà mà ntso i bo̤
if he had accepted my word, he would not have
suffered that; § ’ǎ’ṅka

mb̀d, n. calabash with long neck and small opening

mbol̀’ , n. _a-ma sediment (of wine or other)

mbolo̤mbolo̤’, adj. viscous; bo̤ mbo̤l̤mbo̤l̤’ the broth
(or gravy) is thick.

mboniì, n. idler, sluggard
mb̍tsu’, n. fufu-ball; § mbǒ̤̤’tsu’
mbo’, n. loaf, ball, lump (bread, clay, soil, etc.);
i kwà’ màùn, k̤̍ td mmae’ti moǎ’ mbo̤’ bo̤, ndzǐ m’
what a man, before he finished one loaf, he started
another; fig. he is jumping restlessly from one idea
to another.
mb̀’li, n. pl. bàmb̀’li idler, unfit person
mbo’nì, n. (a-ma) buttock
mb̍’’ntsa’, n. pl. mbo̤’ntsa’ clod, lump (to plaster the wall)
mb ṅgùṅ, n. pl. mbo’ṅgṳ̀ṅ loaf of bread, lump of maize, of dough
mb̍’tsa’, n. pl. mbo̤’tsà’ stamped clay, clod of clay (for pottery)
mb’tsu’, n. pl. mbo’tsu’ fufu- ball; § mbǒ̤̤tsu’
mbùblikà̯d, adj. reddish
mbàùbtì, n. stammerer, stutterer; mbùbti kǎ ntob a ku̯s̯ mà
I used to stutter;

yo màn bo ṅgàṅ-mboùbti this person is a stutterer.

mbùd, n. kind of mat, made of split ribs; women’s umbrella
about l.2o m long; § womcti

- (o -
mbùdbud, n. beginning; § numbùdbud
mbùlibuli, adj. pell-mell

mbùm, n. (à-ma) 1) body, trunk ;
mbùm i tǎṅ me his body is covered with an irritating rash;
mbùm à mà mbo̤ ya bo = a tsi ndzo̤̍, a i mù ndzṳ̤̍’ a
that is no longer my body; it seems to be someone
else’s, because of an unwell feeling; § mâ Iy̯’ mbùm à,
a;
mbùm also: ko̍d penis; ù b̤̌ ntsu nù mbi’ ko̤d mbò m̌’
nǎ, ù mfuṅ ni lṳ̯ṅ womti ṅgâ, mbùm à if you talk about
a problem of the penis with a mother, you use a decent -
name and say my body’,
2) p. used as p. refl. myself, etc.;
bo beb mbùm yàb they guard themselves;
i b̍ṅsi mbùm i hae is boasting ; § bo̤ṅni ;
i dzǎ̤ mbùm i be is giving himself up;
bi dzi’ mbùm yn ni fà’ ndzamugṳ̯ you make an effort in
many ways;
i mbùm i he curses himself (to justify himself)
ù dzo’ mbùm ù ni mn you have made yourself dirty;
i Iǎ’ mbùm i, nta̤m bèd my̯ be uses his body like a dice
= he jeopardizes’ his life, he stakes his life;
i pelli mbùm i he is dressing up;
bo ṅu’si mbùm yàb they are impertinent, are forward;
ù sàti mbùm ti you are boasting too much;
ù suṅti mbùm ù you are bragging;
bi tsam mbùm yn you are exhibiting yourselves.

mbùm, n. neeting place (appointed) ;
bo kǎ’ mbùm they promised to meet (time and place).

n. (a-ma) esgeg: jpgob ni mbùm teohe fovl is laying
eggs; yò mb̤m ṅgob à this is my egg.

mbumbù, n. namesake; mbumbù à my namesake; § ku

mbumbù, adj. pell-maell, disorderly, confused; nù mbumbù con-
fused affair

mbùmmàndzi, n. crossroad; mbùmmaàndzi yà e? where is the
cross-road? § nta’màndzi

mbɑ̌mṅgob, n. also: bùmṅgob egg
mbɑ̌mtṳ, n. pl. mbumtuṳ̯ trunk (of a tree)

mbàùn, n. eruption (e.g. after shaving without soap)

 

= (ds -

mbun, n. seal, pledge; mà kgṳ̯’mm mbun confirm

mbanbun ,, adj. restless;
mà la’ mbûnbun pass the night restlessly

mbun, n. flock, herd; mbuṅ mbi a flock of sheep or goats ;
§ ban, ṅkwa̤d

mbuṅ, n. step (on ladder or staircase)

mbuṅlu̯’γṳ̀, n. refugee (with no home)

Mbuàṅlu̯’γṳ, a person’s name

mbuṅmbi, n. herd of goats

mbuṅmbùṅ, adj. rectangular

mburṅntsù, n. chin

mbuṅntsù’, n. the morning

mbuṅṅgo̤, n. also: γuṳγa’ntsù jaw

mbṅṅkab , n. man without money ;
mboṅṅkab yâ, mu̍ṅgwi ndu̯m (Pr.) Mr. ithout- Money
said, ’women are witches’ (it is better not to bu any).
The fox said the grapes are too sour’’, because he
could not get any.

mbùṅńaṅdù, n. swarm of bees

mbuṅtàṅ, n. beam supporting the ceiling and protruding out of
both walls

mbuṅtìkun , n. cushion, pillow; § bauṅti
mbuṅù̯, n. dove, pigeon; mburni̤ bi kṳ̯ndzù’ tame, domestic pigeons
n. turtle-dove
mbù’, n. high raffia palm; wine, fruit of same
mbù’, n. 1) region, usually compound bordering on another ;
bo san mbù’ iba they split in two groups ;
mbù’ ma wu’ le teobae cegion there;
ni; le mbàù’ me’ in that whole region;

mbàù’ ma Fumban teohe region of F.; § mboù’ṅgoṅ
2) share of work; mbù’ mà dz̤’ti ndab

 

 

= g; =
the task of sweeping the house; § tuy abfà
mbàù’, adj. green, untripe (of fruits)
mbù’, n. nctch, incision (sign of confirming s.th.) § w mbàù’

mbu’, n. pl. bàmbu’ntùṅ, deaf person; ù mbuntuṅ = i vu mbu’
he became deaf.

mbu’, n. ceafness, ignorance, minority, under age, inability ;
i kà y nù le ni mbu’ he did it out of ignorance;
i mbu’ n; mà dzi nù he is unable of knowing anything;
i mbu’ ni; tsu he is awkward when it comes to speaking;
§

Mbu’mvì, n. ruler of the world; § Mobu timvi the lmighty

mbù’ndàm, n. region of Tsaṅ; called thus, because it is spread
out like a net

mbu’ntan, n. one who does not know the rules or conventions
of the market; he is easily cheated.

mbu’ntùṅ, n. deaf person

n. pl. of bu’ṅgòṅ part or section of town or country ; § mb§’
mbu’ṅwà’nì , n. pl. of bu’ṅwà’nì books, letters

Mbu’timvi uler of the world

mbu’tu, adv. ”ruler of the head-”’; exceedingly, extremely ;
wo̤ e, nù’ dzam mè mbu tu, dzitǐ i tsàni ti
truly, the work of God is extremely rich, his wisdom
is difficult to understand
i sǎ’ mè mbu’tu he is extremely tall.

mbù’wè, n. also: mbù’γ wè wooden hammer; § we

mb, n. tree sp. whose resin (en) is used in many ways, e.g.
to glue or to make calabashes watertight, or to delay
the fermentation of wine, or to tune the hand-piano’,
or as fuel for little lamps, or as medicine against
pneumonia, etc.
mbàrṅmbṳ̯, n. fruit of the mb-tree, when soaked in
warm water only and exposed to the sun, it can be
eaten. § nesalaṅmbuy

mb, n. resin or glue. of mb tree

 

- s -

mbu̯d ,, n. also: mbṳadnù barrister-at-law, intercessor
mbu̯kà̯d, adj. bad, ugly, evil, disastrous

mbu̯m, n. cowry shell, worn as wreath or bracelet by the wives
of chiefs to distinguish them; § běd

mbu̯n, n. mcother’s breast; milk;
cow milk

mbǔhàm, n. also: mvo̤nàm, old word for ma ṅgẁn ’ in the field

mbṳ̯̀ṅ, n. rain; mbo̤ṅ ni ndzṳ the rain is grazing’ (when
hanging in the sky, but not yet falling) ;
fem ma mbènndab the rain splashes on the wall;
mbu̍ṅ kw̤̌d it is thundering;
y̯’ (or: mbṳ̍ṅ len yṳ̯’) mè, ndzi b fo the
rain has given us much trouble; our clothes are drenched;
mbo̍ṅ la’ nd̤̀Fm the rain continued overnight;
mboṳ̍ṅ lo it is raining: mboṅ lo it has rained;
mbo̍ṅ nǎn a tohe rain hindered me;
mbo̤ṅ ṅam (nṅgoòṅ l̤̍’ me’ the rain covers the whole sky;
mbu̍ṅ san it is becoming dark; rain is approaching ;
mbu̍ṅ ni nsu’ ṅu the rain washes the moon, it causes
the moon to become bright;
mb̍ṅ tsod teaae rain stops;
mb̍ṅ the rain abates;
mbo̤ṅ ni ntuṅ ṅu (= ni ndib, à tǎ’ mà ku a) the rain
’ buries’’ the moch, covers it at the period of new-
moon; vù it begins to rain or rain falls.

mbuṳ̀ṅku̯̍kwà̯d, n. rain from clear sky, fig. unexpected, surprising things;
mbo̤̍ṅkṳ̍k wà̤d lo a an unexpected case of death
happened to mese, or s.th. like a bolt from the blue.
mbṳ̀ṅlìfod , n. a cloud-burst, often causing a land-slide; §
mfòn , v. also: mà woòmti mfòn to honour the chief

mbu̯ṅnìkà̯d, adj. round, globular; § buṅni, tuni

mbṳ̯̀̇sùṅkòb, n. heavy tornado rains (in Sept.), lit. storm damaging
the forest

mbṳ̀ṅsǔ’ mbobṅkà’, n. small rainy season; § timbobṅkà’,
lit. the rain washing or wiping the dust from the raffia

mbuṳ̀̇sǔ’ n. small rainy season (middle to end of ec.
which carries away the chaff)

-
mbù̯ṅť̤̇g̤, n. heavy tornado rain which flattens the grass

mbṳ̇tǒ̤ṅkà’, n. rain (middle to end of Nov. that causes disorder in
the grass)

mbṳ̀ṅvo̤’timbobntsà’, n. rain which washes away dust or ashes;
§ mbobṅkà’

mbṳtibṳti, adj. boiling; § oot;

M bu̯tu village between Bali and Bamenda, now Mbatu
mbu̯’, adj. raw, uncooked, ugly; § mbu’

mbu̯’tu, n. unlucky person

mè, adj. very (often joined with onom. );

à b̌ṅ mè it is very good; où tsu mè you talk like that;
§ bub

mèn, n. also: mèn insect’s bite, snake’s poison, wasps

me’, adj. all, totally, completely; ted yàb me’ all three;
ṅgoòṅ bùn me’ all people; ob̤̍ kà γǒ wu’ me’ = by’ me’
kà yǒ̤ wu’ we all went there;
ṅgoṅ yo’ me’ all of us; rṅgoṅ yàb me’ all of them.

mè’ti, v. 1) finish, complete, die, kill;
i mè’ti mṳ̍ mbi’ l̯̀n he died of want;
bo mè’ti mà kud ndaâ yàb they completed their house;
or: bo meè’ti ndíâ yàb mà kud ;; ;
2) adv. last, finally, at last ;
ba i kà to. n i boà fd bi to, i mè’ti ntsǎ s his father
came, his mother and brothers came and finally he
came also.

mfa, n. pearl; string of pearls, pearl embroidery;
mfà li (instead of mfà i his pearl)

mfâdfad, adj. thickly overgrown (road or path, etc.); § fad
mfam, n. mail: maà tso’ mfam extract nails

mfamuysa’sì , n. kind of pearl

mfankàòàòṅ, n. handle or stick for spear

mfâṅgwâ’we’, n. also: mfâṅgwâ’γwe’ pearl neclace;

 

= gg -

mfaṅkòṅ, n. horizontal beam or bamboo pole in housewall; § koàvnṅ
mfa’, n. forked, supporting pole; § nta’
mfa’fà’maṅgwa̤n, n. pl. γàṅfà’maṅgwa̤n farmer
mfa’ndam, n. pl. fa’ndam bridesmaid
mfa’wo, n. crevice or fissure between stones
mfad, n. pl. bàfa(d, also: fa̤dfa̤d brothers, sisters;

but: f̤d ba ny, brothers or sisters ;

sùn ba, b fadfa̯d, ni ndze ṅgo̤’ nď bin bnbin ṅgâko̤ e?

my friends, you are brothers, why do you hurt one

another?

mfěfè ńuṅtu, n. untidy hair ;
yo̤kà, ńǐûṅtu bi, ndzǒ̤ what a big-head

mfěyum, n. also: fěyum unexpected gain, not rightful
noi, n. present. of honour; Fe kaà nazàbṳ̤, nto, mfi a m̤̌
Fe shot a cutting grass and gave it to me;
ṅ’kà yǒ̤, ntǎǐ’ ṅkab matsà̤̍ṅni, nto, mfi ba m
I had gone to the coast for money and came and gave
it to my father;
mà fi bo̤ mbò mǒ’ mùn, i tsǎ u ke i lǎ u a to fi or
give, surrender, something to somebody who is above
you.
mfi, n. puss
mfi, adj. new, unused or to be used again; yum mfi new thing
mfid, n. indignation; i sâmm mfid he shows his indignation; § ̇kṳd
mfǐfûn, adj. for sale, ready for sale; § fun
mfì’, n. measure, sketch, example ;
bo lobti mfi’ they take measure;
màùn ma ndobti mfa̤d i bo one should not imitate
one’s brother, trying to be eqgual in gaining money; §
mfì’ kɑdzìd, n. kind of conduct, example

mfiì’ lobtìsǎ’ màndzì, n. measure of road, yardstick

mfi’ lṳ̌ fa’, n. measure of work

- 2 -

mfi: nù, n. example, model, standard, plan

mfi’ ṅgo̤, n. degree of suffering, affliction, distress;
mt a nd my a, t the measure of my
misery is too heavy on me.

mfì: yum, n. plan, model
mfòbàangel, n. king of angels

mfàòm, n. pl. bàmfòm political adversary, enemy;
mfòm ma (̇gwa̤n the eneny is in the battlefield.

mfòmon, n. pl. mfòbon spoiled child

mfòmu̯su̯ṅ, n. bird sp. ’king of birds’’; it is a smaller bird which
is considered to predict or to foretell,;
ù bǒ̤ nt’ mà yγǒ̤ ma mǒ’ màùn, ti’ i, ndzu’ mfòmusyṳṅ
ntsu mè swaṅ swaṅ ’, mbo̤̍ u to yγǒ̤, d ti yo màùn le bo;
lâ, bǒ̤ ntsu “kòkònko̤lon’, mbo̤ u to yo̤ màùn le
if you want to go to the compound of another man to
meet him and hear the king of birds’ sing swavì s wad
you will not meet that man; but if the bird calls
’kònkòkolon’, you will see that man. r: with regard
to the first call swarṅ swan ’ you may go and even
meet him, but the matter you will discuss with him,
will turn out to be no good: od b̤ ṅgǒ̤ěû ndzo̤ mùn le,
nù; yi, d 1’ ṅgǒ̤ mbi’ le a, ti boòṅ bo̤ if you go, the
matter will not be successful.

?

mfòn, n. pl. bàfonfòn, fonfòn, fòn; chief, king;
note: mfoòn erod king erod;
mfò bàs wen chief of elephants;
mfò bànoď̯̤̯ royal law;
mfà bày uda king of the jews; mfoò yab teoheir king;
mfò bàfonfòn king of kings;
fò Bà’ni chief of the Bali- tribe ;
fò Egypto, fò Etiopia, fòn bàEgypto,
fà Mom king of the Bamuns;
ma mbàti (ṅgâ, ù tṳ̍n, ntsà a bo, ù ť̤n bo̤ t̤̍n mfòn
do not think that you are stronger than I, you are
only powerful through the chief;
mfàn mà’ loṅ i kuṳ̯ntàn the chief places his stool in
the market; § banfòn, b̤̍ṅ, lanku, lad, 1̌ṅfòn, nɑ̌fòn

mfònfon, adj. found; ṡkab mfoònfon maà ni ṅkud ndab b, (Pr.)
found money does not build a house.

mf̌ǒntou . n. pl. fǎnnto̤ subchief

= 211 =

mfòn-nù-ntsinìkà̯d, n. chief justice
Mfòsà one of the seven groups of the Bali tribe

mfoàd, n. (a-ma) flesh from the bottle pumpkin;
rotten flesh in wounds; rotten material;
b̌ lam bǒ̤ mb̌ṅ titi, bo dzṳ boà mfòd mi if the
pumpkin is very good, it is eaten with the flesh.

mfom, n. fetish; mnda mfom fetish hut;
mfom bo̤ m’ nda-ńikòb the fetish is a place
of worship;
Samuel boà bimo’ f̤̯jd bi bo̤ bùn Pǎmbàòdsà’; à ni mbo̤
madz ta’ lùm, bo kà̯d mfom ni kědzy, ntà ńàm boà
ṅg̤̍ṅ mbo̤ ndù’ sě ṅgâ, bùn tsi ni boni, ku̯̍ mu̯ ndzaṅka̤d
bo, ṅǩ’ mfa bon; bu̯mbàṅ fa tsi boà ṅgwa̤d mb bṳ̤̍wi, ma
1l̤̯ ’ mfom le, bo yàbti; mfom bo̤ yǎb ba, màkysu
Samuel and some of his brothers belong to the Pombodsa’;
once a year they sacrifice food and meat broth, fufu and
also palmwine to the fetish, so that people ma, live in
peace and be free of diseases and also have children.
Men give salt and oil to the women at the place where
the fetish is and they share it. The fetish is their father,
a very ancient one.

mfom, n. poor man

mfommvi, n. next day, tomorrow morning ;

ni mǎ’ mfommvi day after tomorrow
mf̌̌ṅ, n. pl. bàmfoṅ cow, ox; momfòdṅ calf
mfo, adj. fresh, cool; ntsi mfo̤ fresh, cool water

mfùdf̤d, adj. cast; yum mfo̤dfo̤d cast object:
cast tobacco-pipe

mfo̤ka̤d , adj. cold, bad, ugly , indecent;
tsu mfo̤kad bad talk; ntsi mf̤kaàd cold water;
kě mfo̤kaaàd usgly things, impure things ; § fo
mfo̤mu̯ka̯d, adj. unwashed, not oiled, dirty
mfo̤nika̤d, adj. peace-loving, calm, pleasant:;
mfo’ mfo̤nikaàd pleasant, fresh air;

mfo̤nika̯d soft wind; § boni, foni

mf̀’, n. (a-ma) chaff

==2;2

mfo’, n. air, cold, fever, wind;;
à kà adziti, i bo̤ ni mfo’ first he had fever;
mfo’ ńǎ’ i fever made him die;
i kɑǐ̌ mfo̤’ hae died of fever;
mfo’ ni ṅko a ko feel cold;
mfo’ y (or: wě) a 1 am feverish;
mfo̤’ mfo̤nika̯d fPfesh, soft air; § fo’, fo’ti , b̤̌mfo’

mfo̤’tika̤d, adj. allaying (pain);
fù mfo’tikaà d soothing, allaying medicine:
smell, fragrance

mfùtuṳ̯, n. (a-ma) herb sp.

mfu’, n. partner in marriage (female); ndu yo’ suṅ ṅgâ, bu yo
ṅkwaàli n’ suṅ mboò mfu’ à ṅgâ, bà po la, ṅkwà-
li ṅgwàfṳd le e? Mfu’ à yâ, ndib ma nted bo̤
our husband said we should go and and hoe the maize.
I told my partner, let us go and hoe the maize. She said
that it was not yet time to do so.

mfu’, n. also: mvu’ foam on palmwine or on the mouth of a
sick person.

mfṳ̯̯̀, n. also: mfu̯̍̀mi’, pl. bàmf̯̀mi’ blind person;
ndza̤̤m m’ mṳ̍ mf̤ ni mi’ mi darkness blinded his
eyes; i v̌’ mf̯̤̀̌ he became blind.

mfo̤̍ndzàm, n. pl. fṳndzàm handle of an ax; it is also the tool
used for capital punishment by the map ; (executioner
of the Ngumba club).

mfunfṳ̌n , adj. locked
mfṳ̌ìhtan, n. person, experienced in business

mfṅ, n. (a-ma) wound, scar; mf̯ṅ ndǐ̌ bo they are wounded;

a,

i titi mfṳ̯ṅ à he knocked against my wound.
mfuṅkù̯mad, n. pock-mark, mark from small-pox

mfù̯ṅnì n. space, fissure, slit; opportunity , possibility;
mà fa mf̤̍ṅni give a chance (to escape, sto.) ;
dzaṅ fa mf̤̍̇ni mb i he will recover;
i yo mf̤ṅ̍ni mà ten he took the opportunity to run away;
boòm ta lun màè pib, Iǎ, mbàti ṅgâ, mǎ’ mf̤̀ṅni kǎ wu’,
à boṅ mà nyṅ mǒ’ kědzṳ miyà wu’ my stomach is quite
full, but I think there is still some room for a little more.

: oo -

mfṳṅnimùn , n. pl. mfuṳ̀ṅnìbùn a single person who does not know
where he belongs to; § yo̤γo̤’ mn, s wâmùn

n. space between two houses
mfùṅnìtati, n. toae space in the suspension above the fireside

mfuṳńàm, n. slilly, inexperienced person; lit. blind person;
mf̍nàm tso madzo’ nàmmi’ (.) a blind animal has
come among animals with sight = he is the only
silly one among the clever ones.

mfuńùm, n. night
mfu̯̍kintan , n. pl. γàṅf̤̍tntan swindler, market-faker
mi, p. poss. 3. sg. cl. 126 his, her, its; mi’ mi his eyes

mo,, n. swallow, bear, take upon be finished, settle;
à mn uo remainder (in a calculation) ;
kě bi m m̤̌ his things are used up, are finished;
bo ni mmika̯d fǎnnù bab bo ni bo they bear one
another’s fault ;
mà m s’d mà mb̌ṅ bo̤ to swallow food not paid for,
is not good; § sàùd, mi nti

mìfà’, n. a planter:; shortened form of mbifà’, ṅgàṅbifà’

mili, v. accustom s o. to s.th. ;
bo ku̯ mṳ̍, mbo̤ mili mbùm yàb mà ni nsani bòṅ bo by’
they have matured and have grown up in a way to
distinguish between good and bad; § don

mimi’, n. also: mù̯̯ûmi’ devw,;
à ni mbo̤ ni mba’mbà’, mimi’ bo̤ ni ṅgo̤ in the morning
dew is on the grass.

min, p. poss. ?. pl., cl. 16 your; mi your eyes

mini, v. be accustomed to;
ṅgòṅ mbom nù me’ mini mg̤̍ mboò mṳ I am accustomed
to everything; § don, mili

mìnti, n. throat trouble; lit. saliva-swallowing

miyà , ad. also: mià some (little bit, easy) ;
fa mu̍̀ tsi miyà give me some salt;
à miyà little remains; it lacks some;
i ni ndzid miyà he bvalks slowly;

- 211 -

redupl.: miyàmiyà very slowly, take it easy;
miyà ka at work: take it easyl

mi’, n. pl. of li’ (ta-ma) eye, face, look, regard;
mi’ our eyes; ni mi’ mfòn at the time of the
king; mimi bi’ni mà wad ṅgoòṅ bi his face is starting
to get (cut) wrinkles;
mi ’ ṅgo6en ni ndan ky ntsàmbad the runaway’s eyes
opened, when he reached the mountain peak (Pr.) =
he realizes his mistake.

mǐ’, v. snap at, snatch at ;
vu mn’ u, nsam death snapped at you, but failed;
you have scarcely escaped death;
i mi’ a ni muni he threatened me with a knife;
lawum kà m’ mâṅgob the hawk dashed at the
chicken, but failed.

ini , V:. swing, wave ;
Gomna le m’ bà i the officer waved with his hand
(to command silence).

m̌mu̯bù’ , n. pl. of li’m̯bù’ holes for wooden nails in palmribs
mi’ṅwà’nì, n. pl. of li’ṅwà’nì letter

v. sprinkle (water, etc.); wave (good-bye); § kab
wave to come; § azàci

mmǎ’ma’, adj. throw over (gown or coat)

Mmǎ’mvi (Lord of the world; note: Ngaàarṅmǎ’ bò our Lord;
Ngàaṅgmǎ’ yin your Lord.

m, v. chat round the fire ;
bo ni mm ma nda mu’ ni mf̯ńùm they are chatting
in the heated room at night.

mo, interj. to express agreement towards the greetings of a sub-
chief, or a greeting response by a subchief (mfònntì)
§ po̤d

mo-, n. in compounds: (from mon child) child of, little of; small;

’

fa mb mu̯̍ mândù’ give me some palmwine.

mâbèd, n. lot (cowry shell, coin, etc. ) ;
mobed i làṅ his lot has won;
bo ta̯m bèd teohey cast the lot; § bed

 

 

- 2o;s -
mâbotuṳ, n. pl. bonmbotṳ branch
mâbu’ṅgòṅ, n. pl. bonbu’ṅgoṅ small village, hamlet; § motsu ṅgoṅ
n. pl. bonfa’ twins ; § fa’
adv. a bit, a trifle

mâkaṅ , n. pl. bonkaṅ small bowvil, plate;
ṅko̤’ṅko’ small bowls, plates, saucers

mâkaâṅnsà’, n. also: mânsà’; pl. bonkâṅnsà’ erring child running
to s.o.; nursling child, in opposition to one’s own
child; § momvivi

msked, n. pl. bonked (a-ma) arrow point; §
mâkàòṅ, n. pl. bonkàòṅ (a-ma) spear point

mâkun, n. small bed; mokun ku̯sṳ̯ b̤̌ nsuṅ ṅgâ, ù s mm̯̤ t
kù’ ṅko̤ ntaṅ mù bo̤ (Pr.) when the small bed in
front says you have broken wind, you can no longer
deny it = if your wife (who is the closest to you)
gives evidence against you, you can no longer contest
or justify yourself.

mâkǔ’, n. small colocasia ;
mk’ ńin kà bubti ṅgòṅ kǐ’ me’ (Pr.) one rotten
manyok spoils all others.

mâkuɑ̌’, n. painful toe, whitlow

mâku̯bò, n. pl. bonk̯bò under age, minor (who is still carried
on the back or on the arm).

mâku̯̍ta, n. pl. bonkù̯ta fatherless child, illegimate child
(it becomes the property of the chief); § mosàkṳ

mskù̯u’ntu̯’, n. pl. bonkù̯ru’ntṳ̯’ disobedient child ;
nt̯’ ni ndzu’ ntṳ̯’, ni ntsa’ ni tùṅ ti
the disobedient child hears the commandment, but
his ears show contembeot for it.

mâkwadmàùn, n. little, lively man or person

mâkwèti, n. small loincloth; § kweci

mâli’ , n. pl. mâmi’ (rarely boni’), (ta-ma) pupil (eye)
mâli’ ta ny pupil.

- 26 -
mâlo’, n. slight disability, small stain, small blame
mâl’tintṳm, n. child of encouragement (also used as a name)
mâluṳ̯’, n. pl. bonlù̯,. part (of body)
Màòm, pl. bSmòm Faumban, Bamoun
moǒm, n. furuncle, boil

mm, v. touch, try, be obtrusive, be importunate,
looking for trouble;
mà mm (̇gàm try s.o. with cunning questions;
mǒǎ’ mùn kà bùmti a ma màndzi, mbi’ni mà mǎm
ṅgàm ni boòm a; i mbati a ṅgâ, ù ni mfin fǐ ndikàṅ
oo mu e? àù ni mfin sě, ni ndzṳ ndz̤̯̀mntan bo̤ mu
e? màùn le t’ mà lh nù ndzamṳ. someone met
me on the road and made me tell him some of my
secrets; he asked me, how do you sell gunpowder?
ow much do you gain from selling?’ e tried to
know many things, he ’wormed himself’’ into his
secrets; he tried to draw secrets out of him by
crafty persistence; § bom, ṅgàm

mâmbaṅ, n. pl. bonmbaṅ, small pots

mbâmbod, n. pl. bonmbod baby

mâmfàòn, n. pl. bonmfòn chief’s child

mâmfàòṅ , n. pl. bonmfàòṅ calf

mâmiyà, adv. a little bit; § mopid

mâmi’, n. pupil (eye); § mdo6(;’

mommòm, adv. formerly mommom: in vain, without purpose,
without reason; (ṡkwo̤̯ n mommom naked back;
bùn mommoòm ordinary people (often used of pagans);

§ ňbàńikòb mommom

màòmti, v. touch, give opinion on;
mà màòmti nadzo̤mbi touch a sheep to find out its value

mòmtso’, n. ulcer; § měǎm, sǎbyum

mâmàùbàṅ, n. pl. bonbùnbàṅ maulatto (person with white and
black skin), child of two whites;

=21:=-

MsSmùn Son of man (Bible)

momù§’ṳ’, n. tiniest spot, stain (used in negative sentences);
momùlṳ’ ntsa’ tiny spot of agricultural land;
mo̍mulṳ’ ntsi vevy little water;
momu̍lṳ̯’ ntsibǎṅ tiny drop of blood;,
mâmùlṳ’ kě tsi iittle bit of oil or salt.

momuṳ̀ṅgwi, n. pl. bonbù̯wi small girl

, n. pl. bonbṳ̀ṅkṳ little child (out of infancy)
mâmu̯ńi, n. pl. bonbuṳ̯ńi small knife, table knife

mâmvivi, n. pl. bonmvivi one’s own begotten child; § mokaṅsà’

mâmv̯̀vṳ̌, n. pl. bonmv̀vǒ̤ son of destruction, child loafing
about in the world and thereby losing character;
child that has got lost;
bo̤ i mà mà tsi mavṅko̤ṅ
ǩ ba i bo̤, i mà nt’ mà yǐ’ nt’ ba i bo̤
Mu̯tsi’yà is a child roaming about; it does not like
to stay with its father, neither does it like to obey
his orders.

mâûâmvu̯, n. pl. bonmvṳ young dog, puppy

mon, n. pl. bon; child bo nǎn mon le teohey tie some medicine
round the child to ward off diseases;
mon sùd màd ba i teoae child resembles its father;
mon o le borṅ mṳ̤̍ = mon o e tsini mǧ̯̤ pregnancy
has started.

mândaṅ, n. small calabash, used for oil

mândìb miyà, n. short time

mûândùn , n. small hammer: §

mândù’ bi’ti, n. small, upper grinding stone feor fine things

bṳ, n. small grinding stone for camwood
mândùrṅ, n. small amount, small number, small fortune

mândàù’ṅgù̇, n. upper grinding stone for maize, millet, etc.;
mondàù ṅgo̤̍ṅ. i ṅkǎkǎ upper gr. stone for rough
grinding;

mondù’tita upper gr. stone for pepper; the lower

== 2: -

grinding stone, e.g. for corn, is called woṅgo̤ṅ, ; ṅguy;
bo ni ndo̤m ṅgwàfṳd ma wo ni mâoândàù ṅgṳṅ
for that reason they grind corn with the upper stone.

mândzaṅ , n. pl. bonndzaṅ small plank, laid across ditches;
cross-bar of balaphon, laid across two banana stems;
§ ndzaṅ

mândz̀m, n. pl. bonndzà̤̯m child given to the father of the wife
or his lawful follower, instead of money, or:
child whose mother recieved insufficient bridal money.

mândzù’, n. pl. bonndzù’ leogal child ; § ndzàù’

mânsà’, n. pl. bonnsò’ seed, seedlings, fruit

mânsuṳ’, n. pl. bonnsṳ’ wife’s first child dying in the family.
It is bewailed a little and in the evening only a small
funeral meal is offered. on the first night the mother
of the dead child goes to her father’s compound and
on the following day she will be brought back powdered
with camwood, as if to marry again. If children of her
husband’s other wives have died before, the custom is
the same for each dead child of a wife.

mâûnswè’tinù, n. small fault, lack or stain

n. small piece of cloth of the Balidress hanging down
at back; § ntǎndzi

mântobnsi Bà’ni, n. pl. bonntòbnsì Bà’nì genuine Bali, also: Bà ni
ntuṅ ̇g a̤n

mântsamtsam, n. spoiled child (always being carried)
mântsi, n. pl. bonntsi (orphan

mântswa’titswa’ti, n. pl. bonntswa’tìtswa’ti bastard, no genuine child;
§ mâsàk̤̀, sàky

mântswa’yum. adv. a few, some;
mântswa (ṅg wàfṳd some maize; mò̌nts wa ’γum ṅkwin
some fire

n. some injustice, s.th. unbecoming

mâṅgòn, n. pl. bonṅgòn first-born child, ’child of virgin’; § ṅgoòn

mâṅgòṅ. n. pl. bonṅgòṅ liberal, independant person, opposite

N

==21g;=

to ṡkwaàn slave;

i kà vi m bí (ṅkwàn, mvi m̌’ ta’ boɑ (together with)
moṅgòṅ hae begot one son with a slave woman and
begot another with a free woman. ;

mâṅkoa’u̯̍, n. pl. bonṅko’̯ spoiled child;
moṅko’̯ kà fàni ṅgwi ba i (Pr.) the spoiled son
committed adultery with the wife of his father
(a spoiled child does not pay).
mâṅkuṅkuṅ mùn, n. man of medium size ; § ṡ“kuṅkuṅ
mâńùm mttid , n. (old saying for mǎyum moǎpid) minor thing
mopid, adv. a little bit; § momiyà just a bit, měǎyum

mâpo̤b sisi, n. small black stain

mâpo̤m, n. small stain

mâsàkuṳ, n. (à-ba) pl. bonsàkṳ, bastard, child of wench; § mok̤ta,
mântswa’titswa’ti

mâsa’, n. (a-ma) pl. bonsà’ small matter of dispute

mbsi. n. niche in grave ,, where the corpse is laid; two corpses
are never laid in one grave; each is absolutely on
its own or left alone; § si

mâsobàṅ, n. (a-ma) rudder

mâtàṅ , n. (a-ma) pl. bontàṅ teoe lower ceiling in the house which
is not protruding from the outside walls, but is laid
on the mboṅtàṅ inside; § ntsotànṅ

mâtě̌̌ṅ, n. (à-ma) pl. bontòṅ throat, larynx, uvula; fig. covetousness ;
mâtǎṅ ù wu’ ti your uvula is, very fat = you are a.
glutton; mo6stǒṅ ù ld’ti ti you are very greedy;
motoòṅ kutàòṅ (Pr.) greediness dies of greed = if you
want to eat only the best, you will experience bad
luck; § ton

mâtsu , n. (a-ma) pl. bontsu short words

mbtsu’ṅgòṅ, n. (a-ma) pl. bontsu’ṅgòṅ little village;
§ motswa iṅgoòṅ, mobu ṅgoṅ

mâtuṅkǒ̤ , n. (a-ma) pl. bontuṅko̤̤ small tree

- 21 -

mâtswa’ṅkù’mù̯, n. (a-ma) a small sect.

mâtswa’tiṅgòṅ; n. (a-ma) little village

mâyum mâpid, n. a small affair, matter; § mâɑpid

mâwoṅko̤ , n. (a-ma) pl. bonwoṅko̤ small stone

m̌̌ṅ, n. (a-ma) brain, marrow

m̌̌ṅtṳ , n. (ama) marrow of a tree-trunk

mǒ̤’, p. indef. sg. one, another, anyone; mo’ ta’ madzo’ bo one
among them; m’ ba’ part of the women;
mǒ’ mà nta̯̤m, mfi mo’ bo̤ one coes not shoot s.th.
and offer it to the other as an honourary present =
they are all of the same rank; § bimo’

m̌’ṅka, adv. once more:; k’ ṅgǒ̤ wu’ m̌ ṅka go there once more.

m̌’ṅkù’, adv. day before yesterday, on an earlier day

mpǎ. n. herb sp. with black berries; it is mixed with colocasia;
the leaves are prepared like spinage;
bo naṅ mpà they cook mpa properly.

mpab, adj. empty (of nut mbiyaṅ bo̤̍ mpaob̍ the peanut shells are emp-
ti; 1’ mpab , also: nǎ mpab part of field , where there
are only empty nut shells; ù fṳ̯ni mbiyaṅ mpab (Pr.)

you are like an empty peanut shell; § pab

mpàd-niì-ṅkù-ndǒ̌’ ni-mbǎ a very impertinent thief;
lit. kick something with the foot and pick up with hands.

mpe ṅkà’, n. grass with hollow stalk

mpètipèti, adj investigated, fathomed; ň mpetipèti clarified matter;
§ peti

mpǒ̤, n. bag vith straps of fibres or leather, carried across
the shoulder

mù-, pref. cl. 1, sg. of cl. 2 bùn
mu, p. poss. ?. sg. cl. 16 your
mùbàṅ, n. pl. bùnbàṅ, white man, also: albino

mù Bà’nì man of the Bali tribe

= 1
mùybli, v. munch food (with toothless mouth)
muɑ̌blò, n. (a-ma) also: mabolo sausages made of cassava
v. swell; ṅkoṅfṳn ta bo a, à mod, ni ndzaṅ a titi a wasp
stung ny hand, it is swelling and is giving me pain;
§
mufundoṅ, n. also: mu̯fundoṅ maize cracked by roasting; § ṅgwaànfṳd
màùk̀ntì, n. short person
mùkùsìsǎ, n. long-legged person
mùkù̯ndùn, n. pl. people of the upper region
mùkù̯nindo̤ṅ, n. pl. bǎku̯nindoṅ the heavenly person

màùku̯sṳ , n. pl. bàk̯s̯ the front man, the former, ancestor

mqpli, v. inflate; moi ntsù inflate the lips ;
moli ṅgo’ inflate the cheeks.

mùmandzà̯m, n. pl. bàmandz;̯̯̀àm teaae later one, the latter
mùmasi , n. pl. bǎmasì the earthly, worldly one

mùmatsṳ̀̇nì , n. pl. bǎmatsṳṳ̯̀ṅnì the people of the lower region,
the people of the coast

mùmbàùṅ, n. pl. bàmùmbùṅ albino, white man

Mùmbu̯kà̯i the one, Satan

mùmfo̤nika̯d, n. peaceful person, man of peace

mù mommom,, n. ordinary person, unimportant person

mùmùòṅ , n. humane person, man as we are

màùn, n. pl. bùn man, someone; mù’n ma kuɑǐ mfòn man,
counsellor, chief’s servant; commissioned by the chief;
i bim mùn he is human again, he has recovered;
ndab b̌ṅ bo̤ ni mùn (.) a house with people is

well off = riches are of no avail without a family.

màùndinduṅ, n. also: mùninduyn, pl. bǎninduṳṅ or stranger ;

- 22: =

à b̌ṅ bà dziti ṅgâ, bà ma mvo̤ ma (̇goòṅ-ninduṳṅ kè
madzo’ bàndindyṅ boo̤ it is good to be careful, unless
we go to ruin in the country of strangers or foreigners.

Mùndzabyi a person’s name

mùndzundzùn, n. a bougnht person, a slave; §

n. a different person

n. stranger; § màùndindyń

n. pl. bùnnbtìna̍bti circumcised man

muɑNs wa, n. pl. bàNs wa people of Ns wa

muɑ̌nntâto, n. pl. bnntâto newcomers

mùntsuṳṅ, n. well-built man, well proportioned person

mùsisì , n. pl. bùnsisi black man, negro

màùti, v. swell (e.g. maize seed, etc.) ;
bo ni mbi b ṅg wàfṳd, bo tsa̯̍b ma ntsi ku̯suṳ ṅkuṅ, à
màòti, ntu ’ ni ndo vhen they plant maize, they soak
it in water first, so that it swells and germinates
quickly.

mutum, n. pl. (teoreigner

màùyani, n. pl. bàanì coyal people in Bali who came from
oṅbà’a

uda, n. pl. bàudà jews; i kà tso mùudà be became a jevw.

mu’, n. fire; mu’ ky ṅkà’ the fire burns the bush;
mu’ ni ndemti ma rṅkà’ teohe fire spread out in the bush;
mu’ tn bò a, à bibi tone fire burned my hand, so that
I got blisters; § tò̌n, ku;
fig. ya mu’ vo̤ no father has died;
mu’ ma vo mu̯̤̍ teohe chief of Bafut is dead.

mùɑ̌’, v. pierce, break through;
à m’ m̯̤̍ tt has pierced straight through, e.g. borer, etc.;
bo m’ γ̤̍̌ they burst into laughter; § po̤

mu’kòb, v. imitate, ape;

mà m’ kòb mùn ape or mimic someone.

= 213 =

mu’ tṳ, v. uproot a tree;
caterpillar ni mmu’tṳ̯, mmǎ masi, bo̤ kwà’ ndzàṳ̯ka̯d
a caterpillar pulls out a tree and throws it down,
it is quite easy.

mu’kùmì, n. incessant fire; mu’ka̤̍vo inextinguishable fire;
mu’ làm (feorge, furnace or hearth (for melting) ;
mu fire in the covered beds on the farm;
mu ṅkun fire made with bean pods. used for burning skin
to show that someone is a man; bo̤ṅkṳ ni nton mu ṅ̍kun mà
na’ti yǎb tsi’ ntṳ̯m, mbo̤ mà y ṅgweèn children burn
bean pods (holding their hands over them) to show their
courage and even to get some burn marks as ornament-s ;

§ k̤̍mi
mù’ti, v. suppress, hot give in to
mù-, pref. sg. cl. 13 pl. bṳ̯- man;

m̯̀, p. l. sg. I (myself) only used with the tense markers tfon3à’;
ni and with the neg. particle ma;
the tone changes to high in the immediate future
ma̍ s mu la’ to I shall also come.

mù, p. poss. 1. sg. my, mine; in connection with kinship terms
and after nouns ending in -;
ba mu ny father; bàba mu̍, ny feathers;
ma mu̍ also: mama à ny, ellder sister;
ni m̀ ny elder brother; bù’̯ m̤̤̍ my remainder.

mu̯-, pref. sg. cl. pl. bṳ- myglòṅ a swing, mug̯mbǐ elephant

mu̯̍, tense marker to denote perfect (already placed after the
verb, its middle tone does not change)
ṅù tum the moon has appeared ;
i kà bo γ’ǒ̤ mṳ̌̍ he had already gone.

mṳ̯̌, prp. 1) with, whereby, thereupon; similar to French en”;
y̌ǒ nù’, m ’buṅṳ masi mu a I am familiar with it from
childhood; a yum e, od kà fuṅ a my̯̌ a e’? is that the
reason, you have called me?

ńùm ta m̯̌ the moon shines upon;

b̤̍ kud ndab le bo̤ m̯̌ e?’ how shall we build the house?
mu̯ yě mǔ̯ ni w e?’ what shall I do with you?

2) Vith neg. particles ku̯g and ti to express duration and
repetition: u ni mbim bim, m̯̤ ndze no, ba ù suṅ a bo
in spite of agreeing, you continuously disobey your father;
bofà à sàni wo̤ bo boà Fkristo, boà yi ti m̤̌ ni ṅkuṳ

= ann -

ṅkoṅni e ?’ umo is able to separate us from christ,
from him not continuously loving us’?

mu̯bàṅ, n. (a-ma) also: ṅkùm mu̯bàṅ, long basket, carried by men
Mu̯bà’dzì village, five hours west of Bafut

n. (a-ma) medium-sized double-edged knife
mùuy̌bòla, n. (a-ma) also: mabòlò sausages made of cassava
mu̯bu’, n. § mi’muybu’

mu̯du, n. tinfoil, solder

Mǔ̯dṳ̌ areas in Metta region, called Medig and Bamedig
mu̯dzà , n. (à-ba) small bird sp.

mu̯dzìn, n. (a-ma) large basin in which to boil water
mu̯dz̯̀kòd, n. pl. bàmu̯dz̯̀kòd (à-ba) sparrow

mu̯fiì, n. (a-ma) very fat kind of palmkernel

mu̯fi, n. auiet, flowing water ; ntsi boo̤ bà’ ma Sànta
a quiet brook in the region of Santa

mu̯fundàòṅ, n. (a-ma) popocorn, maize, soaked in oil and roasted;
ù b̤̌ ntǎ’mà kan ṅgwàfṳd ṅgâ, à ti’ mu̯fundoòṅ, ù kà̤̀d
ṅgwa̤ d à dzi fu’ mboṅka̤d if you want to roast
maize so that it turns into popcorn, you pour oil on
it and then it becomes very white.

mu̯fù ’mbòm, n. pl. bu̯fu’m bòm little red ants sp. that likes
oil and meat.

mu̯fu’tù, n. mist like drizzle
Mṳ̯̀fṳd, n. pl. bǎmù̯fṳd (à-ba) Bafut, people of Bafut
mu̯γo̯’ n. pl. (a-ma) knuckle, ankle
mu̯γu kù, n. pl. mu̯γ̤̀’ ṅkù also: mu̯yγ ẁ’ ṅkù (a-ma) ankle
mùù’ n. (a-ma) teoe passionate, desirous one, addict;
kà ku mu’ndiba’ (Pr.) lit. the passionate one died

from the tobacco fire, he got his pipe even when fire
had broken out and he died; § yo’

=γ 21
mùkali , n. pl. bàmù̯̍kali (à-ba) white man, European
mu̍’kàndzò, n. (a-ma) insect sp., which bores into palmribs

mu̍kaṅkàṅ , n. also: tṳn ṅgùmba (a-ma) double bell, beaten by the
Ngumba; § mo̤ko̤ṅgoṅ

n. pl. bṳ̯ǩ̌dndzà̯m (à-ba) deserter, traitor;
i bd mùkǎdndzà̤̯m he taurns against his own people.

n. creed, rush

n. (a-ma) veranda, terrace, stoop; protruding roof to
protect the wall against rain or to pile wood under ;
bo nuyṅ muṳko̤d ṅgâ, ù b̤̌ ntsi ma ndzwenlàṅ, ma
mfem ù bo̤ they extend the roof, so that when
you sit on the veranda, the rain will not fall on you;
fig. bo mgko̤̤d ni mi’ màùn they sun-blinded the
man, or they made s.o. skittish; § ko̤li

mùko̤ṅgo̤ṅ, n. (a-ma) double bell; § moùkaṅkaṅ

mǔ̯kwan, n. pl. b̯kwa̯n (à-ba) kind of marten

mu̯làd, nu. one hundred thousand

mu̯lo̤ṅ, n. (a-ma) suspension made of palmribs, hung above fireside;
strut to support the roof; § wa’ti ṅgùùm

mu̯bad, n. (a-ma) target for throwing spears; actually lower part
of banana stem, when rolled down a slope, people try
to spear it: § d tsûo̤̍ṅni, esu ṅko̤̍ndoòṅ, ṅko̤̍ndòṅ

m̯bàm, n. (a-ma) small pumpkin bowl

mù̯ùmbàṅ, n. (a-ma) flat foot, owing to swollen ankle; § ṅgàṅ-mṳbànṅ

mu̯mbàṅ , n. pl. b̯mbàrṅ (à-ba) man, male

mùmbǎṅǩ, n. (a-ma) flat foot, owing to a weakness of the ankle;
§

mùmbà’, n. cloud, fog; mo̤̍̀mbà’ ko̤̍mob̤̍ṅ rainless cloud
mù̯mb, n. pl. bà- or bù̯mbǐ (à-ba) pygmy elephant (with short tusks)
mù̯mbòd, n. 1) broad leaf, used to designate successor; the main heir

of the house is decorated with two such leaves, with
a white hen-feather and a red one, also with a quill

26

from a porcupine: bo bo’̤̌ nta’ma tsi’ m’ ndzṳ-nda-mùn kè
ndzṳ̯-nda-mfòn, bo kob muṳ̯mboòd n; tù i, nsǎ mfě ṅgob,
ù fufù, ṅkǐ ’nsǎ mfě-ṅgu’ n bàṅbàṅ ni tàùà i, ile’ na’ti ṅgâ,

t on

bo nuyṅ boni nď i. (ṅgu’’ boo̤ mǒǎ’ muṳ̯sṳṅ ni mfě

bàṅbàṅ, à ni ntsu mè when a guardian is

placed over a house or a palace, his cap is either
decorated with a white hen-feather or a red bird’s feather ;
this indicates that he has been blessed. ((̤̌u’ is a bird with
red feathers that cries ’kokoko”

2) wreath, sign of honour

mùùmbùṅ , n. (à-ba) mulatto; negro with paler skin than usual;
albino; mùn le bǎṅ mè bùṅ this man is dquite red, is paler .

mǔmi’, n. dew; bo kw̤û ti mṳ̯̌̍mi’ they shake off the dew

mùnhàṅ, n. treason, craft, trick; bo ni ntaṅ mṳ̍nàṅ they devised
a trick; §

mù̯ndùn, adj. alone, by oneself; (with p. obj.)
i kà to i ae came alone;
mà-Sama i, mà-kiga mg’ndɑǔn i Sama has a
different mother than iga;
bu̯’à bin muṳ̯ndùǐn bin only you and us;
bo kà nsuṙ nù le bo̤ mb bà uda bo they

told the matter only to the jews themselves.

mù̯ndzàd , n. pl. b̯ndzàd (à-ba) daughter’s children, called so by
the grandfather; sister’s children, the way the husband
calls the children of his sister.

mù̯ndzàd bǎtum, n. (à-ba) grandchildren of foreigners; child of a
wife from a foreign tribe or country;
mg̯ndzàb bàBungo child of a wife from Babungo.

M̀ndziko̤ proper male name and a proverb:
nnan bo̤ ndz̤̀m (Pr.) knowledge follows
experience.

mù̯ndzo̤, n. (à-ba) (Balolo dialect) eyewitness
Balolo are also Bali people and have their own quarters;
u mṳ̍ndzoo̤ kè mu̯̤̍ndzu’ e? (.) did you see it yourself,
or did you only hear it ?

mu̯ndzù , n. (a-ma) trcree sp. its fruit tastes and smaells like garlic
mùjndzu’, n. (à-ma) a person who has heard s.th. about another

person, but is not an eyewitness;
i ko mṳ̍ kà̀nti sa’ mu̯̍ndzu’ he was fined for passing

= 1 -
on what he had only heard; §

mu̯ndzù̯’, adv. also: mù̯ndùn (with p. obj.) alone, only;
mugṳ̯ mundzṳṳ̯̌ m̯’ I alone; ;
à nďb Luka i maṅ ko̤ṅ mṳ only Luke alone
stayed with me.

mù’ntàṅ, adj. trembling (baby) ;
mon à le ni ntsini mùntàṅ, à Iǎb miyà, i dzid

my child stands in a trembling manner, soon it will walk.

mṳ̀ntsintsi , n. tree sp. with brownish bark, sap, the
wood is used feor firewood and for building , the fruits
are small as elder berries.

n. part of an area in Metta (named Ngi by the Engl.)
bàMgṅge the people of Muunge (Minge)

;

muṳ̀ṅgǒ̤vo̤, n. (à-ba) a person who pretends to know everything
better (or a know-it-all) and refuses to accept adrvice.

mù̯ṅgwi, n. pl. bṳ̀ṅgwi or bù̯wi (à-ba) woman;
mo’ mù̯ṅgwi some woman; bi’mo bo̤̍wi some or other
women; Ti a woman of bati; b̤̍wi Ti Bati women
(The Bali-Noṅa adopted the language of the Bati who had
left, when the Bali conquered their site, however not
all of them moved away; they have their own quarters
amonsgst the Bal);
note: v̇g wi à my wife; v̇gwi ù your wife;
wi bab their wives; wo bi his wives; wi mfòn the
chief’s wives; i ti’ mu̍ṅgwi l̤d her pregnancy is far
advanced;
mu̍ṅgwi woman without husband;
muṅg wi ko̯̍nmumtivi a barren woman;
§ azǎn, kom, tso ; dza̤n mùṅg wi;
ndum a married woman (staying with her husband) ;
mṅgwi ni dzṳm or m. ni tsṳm a pregnant woman
muṅgwi mbṳ̯m emphasizing womanhood; mo’ màùn nh mà
suṅ ṅgâ, yò kwaà’ moṳ̍ṅgwi mbuṳn, ni ntsu mb mè
s.o. may say this ’woman of breasts’’ talked to me like that.

mù̯ṅka, n. (a-ma) interest; fà’ le, bo kǎ mfǎ’ ni nù be a, kǎ mà mbo̤ mbi’ yǎb
mu̍ṅka bo̤, à kà bo̤ mbi’ bin they were not serving

themselves but you.

mṳṅkoṅ bambid , n. (a-ma) fFruit sp., red, carrot-like and smooth
(about 3 cm), it contains a lot of seeds.

mùṅkoaṅṅkà’, n. herb sp. with yellow-red flowers and in the shape

aB: -
of a pear
mù̯ṅkṳ̯ , n. pl. bṳṅkṳ (à-ba) child
mùṅùṅ, n. monster; §

mu̯ńàṅgob, n. pl. bu̯ńàṅgob (à-ba) cat, lit. sneaking after chicken

“f y,

mùàṅkwè, n. (a-ma) cap (knitted) ; tsǒ̤’’u mo̤̍ṅàṅkwe a knitted cap
mùńeṅgò, n. also: (à-ma) rubber, gum

mu̯ńi, n. pl. bu̯ń̇i (a-ma) knife; i ku muyvńi he died by the
myńi tsǐ ’mṳ̍ the knife has become blunt;
muyńi kùbli the tip of the knife has become blunt;
bo tsogd tàù i ni ta’ṅka muń ńin they beheaded him
with one stroke; § ntso̤’ muyńi, ṅgud muyńi, sṳṅ

mu̯ńibàm, n. pl. b̯ńibàm (à-ma) weaver’s reed for small loom
mu̯ńib̀d, n. pl. bu̯ńiba̤d (a-ma) sword

mu̯ńikù̇gud ,, n. pl. bṳ̯ńiku̯ṅgud (a-ma) knife without haft; fig. a man
who does not fit in with others.

mu̯ńimbobntsa’, n. pl. bu̯ńimbobntsa’ (à-ba) invective, a cunning,
perfidious person who smiles at s.o., but tries to do
harm behind a person’s back; i fǎm muyńi n;’ mbobntsa’
he wounds s.o. and wipes off the blood with dust;
m̌’ mùn kà wad màùn ni muyńi, měǎ’ màùn bi to, i fòm muyńn
ma mbobntsa’ mà lo̤m y nù mbyṳka̯d, nten bi someone
wounded a person with a knife, when another person
came, he besmeared his knife with dust to conceal his
wicked deed and ran off.

mu̯ńìṅgwěǎṅ, n. (a-ma) grass sp. (sharp-edged) ; § wàn

mu̯ńi ṅṅomṅom, n. (a-ma) sickle, scythe

n. pl. bu̯ńisantṳ (ama) saw

mu̯ńi sù’ , n. pl. bu̯ńi sù’ (a-ma) decorated sword; § s’

muṳ̀nòṅ, n. also: mù̯ṅùṅ, pl. bùnòṅ (à-ba) monster or water spirit
who will kill a man in deep water;
mu̍nùṅ kà 1ǎ’ ta’ mòn a, ṅgǒ̤ m̤̌ the water spirit
took my only child and went away;

(It is believed that the water spirit emerges from the
water, walks about, takes people and kills them.

- -
Noone has ever seen such a spirit).
mu̯ńoṅu̯, n. (a-ma) slyboots

mù̯ńuṅ, n. (Bameta) sorcerer = Bali:

d

ṳń̍ù’ bàṅ, n. eruption, caused by intense heat; measles

mu̯ńu̯ , n. pl. bu̯ń’ (a-ma) kind of glassbead, cylindrical (very much
sought after at the time of r. zintgraff);
tam Mbu’ndam teohe cyl. glass pearls have caused

hardship to the people of Mb., because they could not
sell all of them.

mù̯p̀d, n. pl. bu̯p̯̀d (à-ba) beast of prey sp. (marten-like; it has
a short tail which is capable of regenerating).

mu̯p , n. (a-ma) pear-like fruit sp. with milky juice, used as
medicine against sasa (itch), syphilis and framboesia

mu̯pu’, n. (à-ba) executioner of the Ngumba club who chops off
the heads of the condemned with an ax; net-dress of
the Ngumba, (used as a magic hood) ; § wàd

mù̯jsà, n. (à-ba) sorcerer, magician
ṅgàṅ-mṳ̍sà bo̤ màùn, yi, i tsi ma ndab, ni ndi, nt̤̀ i bo̤
ma kòb a sorcerer is a man who sits in his house
and sleeps, but his heart or spirit is in the forest.
ṅkàm̠̌’ i ti’ nswen kàè (̇g̤̍ńùm; mǒ’ mùn bǒ̤ nta̯m j,
fùfòb i ku (fùfòb is a body without a soul) perhaps
the sorcerer turns into an elephant or leopard and if
someone shoots the animal, the soul of the sorcerer
dies: § (̇gàṅ-sà

mu̯santitàd , n. tree sp. (with red berries); lit. cracker of pots

mu̯saninsòṅ, n. (a-ma) small winged ant sp. (harmless, not eaten) ;

it creeps out of the ground similar to the way termites do.
mu̯sa’sì , n. pl. bu̯sa’si, (a-ma) kind of pearl

musid, n. pl. bṳ̯sid (à-ba) royal antilope (neostragus pygmaeus)

musiṅgòṅ, n. (a-ma) name of drinking club (kum) which gathers
on Ntsu’dzì for drinking; military unit

mu̯sisi, n. plant whose leaves are used for black dye

mu̯sâṅ, n. pl. bàmu̯sûṅ (à-ba) nmission, missionary

==ě 2; =

mu̯soṅ , n. (à-ba) human being; § mo mysovn

mu̯syṅ, n. pl. bu̯sṳṅ, bà-mu̯sṳṅ (à-ba) bird muysyṅ ns mà ni ṅkud
ndab bo (Pr) a talkative bird does not build a nest.

n. pl. bu̯tàm (a-ma) uterus, afterbirth; § ndâmon

mu̯tàtiṅgoṅfà’, n. pl. bu̯tàtiṅgoṅfà’ (à-ba) bird sp. ((water-) wagtail) ;
lit. jumping on the beds on a farm ; § sgovṅfà

Mu̯ta’, n. pl. bamMṳ̯̀ta’ (à-ba) the people of Metta
muito’, n. (a-ma). cape-gooseberries, physalis’’; tree sp.
mu̯tè, n. pl. bu̯tè (à-ba) small field-mouse (edible)
tu mytàè tum ma ta my nose is bleeding;
lit. the head of that mouse comes out at my nose;
(It is thought that a nose bleed is caused by eating that
small mouse; therefore he who often has nose bleed;s,

does not eat the head of this mouse); § mbab

mùtsàgu̯yâ, n. (a-ma) small apron consisting of a number of straps ;
it is attached in front; § wàsi

mu̯tsàṅtì , n. dusk (after sunset); ni ṅkwe ma ṅgwa̤n ni muytsàṅti
the women return from the field at dusk; § tsàati

mu̯tsì , n. pl. bu̯tsì (à-ba) dwarf antilope (philantomba maxwelll),
yet bigger than mpysid.

n. pl. bu̯tsili’ (ama) little insect sp., which causes terrible pain
mu̯tsǒdku̯d, n. kind of syphilis which destroys the penis
mu̯tsǒdkò̤d, n. pl. bu̯tsǒ̤dkò̯d (a-ma) insect sp. (edible)
mu̯vù’ , n. pl. b̯ vù’ (à-ba) bat

mu̯wàd, n. cut, haemorrhage, menstrual flu x

Mu̯yà name of a big river originating in Bali-Bafotsu
Mù̯zàma ((Metta) = Mu̯yà

muṅnì, n. (a-ma) pool, puddle; le lo me, ntsi muyṅni the
rain was heavy and left puddles.

mu’, p. poss. l. sg. excl. cl. 16 ours

mu̯’ni, v. keep silent, sit quietly; i mug’ni he sits silently.

= 221 =
answer; or he is satisfied and rests.

mu̯’̯ mfa, v. put on pearls, necklace;
biìmo’ buṳ̯mbàṅ ni mfa ni ndib lela some men
wear a pearl necklace during Lela; bìmo’ b’ṳ̯mbàṅ ni
ṅgwe’ mfa s“ some men fix pearls around their necks;
but: boṳ̍wi ni ṅkoṅ mà we’ mfǎ the womeaen like to wear
pearls (note the use of and of we’).

mvàglivaglì , adj. unsuitable, improper, awkward

mvà’, n. (a-ma) sweepings, filth, dust, waste;

mvà’ wàù’ i ni li’ ta uaust irritates my eye.

mvi, n. world, i.e. that which comes into existence, which
has been begotten, day;
mvi tǎṅ ti mà sǎṅ it does not want to dawn;
mvi sàrṅ it is becoming light;
mvi ko’mug, à lǎb miyà, à sǎǐṅ the day approaches, it
will not take long and it will be daylight;
mvi sǎṅ, tsǎbńàm ma nǎ ṅg wàfṳd it dawns and there
is a wild cat in the maize- field (said to s.o. who is
surprised whilst doing evil).

mvimvi, adv. everywhere, in the whole world

mvinì, n. (à-ba) children; mvini ma my (own) children; § vi
mvivi , adj. genuine, native; § wa̤n, vi
mvo̤ěka̤d , adj. spoiled, rotten, bad, e.g. potato, etc.
mvǒmbàṅ, n. blood with pus, exuding from a wound

mvo̤nam, n. fiield (old word for ma ṅgwa̤n, also: mbùnàm in

the field )

mvǒnmu’, n. (a-ma) glowing fire, live coal;,
mvǒ̤mmu’ kèti l’ ni ṅkwin sparks flying off
burning firewood.

mvo̤nṅka, n. (a-ma) masgsgot in a raffia palm;
mvo̤n ni mbi kwa̤d mbùm i (nṅgâ, à ni ṅkwa̤d bo ka
(Pr.) while the maggot is eating itself, it thinks it
is eating the trunk of the raffia palm; fig. if s.o.

mvǒ̤vo̤, adj.

mv̤̤̍vo̤, adj

- 222 =

refuses the opportunity to do s.th., he ruins his own
chance.

spoiled, rotten: § vǒ̤

. lost; § vo̤

mv ’ṅg̤d, n. (à-ba) blood-thirsty tyrant, destroyer of the people

mvukqad, n.

pl. vuka̯d (à-ba) the old, the grown-ups;
ba mu̯̍ mvuka̯d nv uncle, the elder brother of my father.

mvuka̯d , adj. grown-up, mature;

mwvu’, n.

mv, n. pl.

mvṳ̌’, n. (a-

i mvukaàd à he is ny senior; § ṅgukad;
mvukad i = mṳ̤ mvuka̯d mbo i I am older than he.

also: mfu’; foam on palmwine or at the mouth of
a sick person, etc. ;

ù bǒ̤ nnyṅ ṅkaṅ ma ntu’, à l? mà f’ ke mvu’ tum
when you pour beer into a cup, it can foam or the
foam rises; mvu’ndù’ foam on palmwine.

bàmvuṳ̯ (à-ba) dog:

mv̯ ni madzi koòb boà (̇go̤ the dog is hunting
in the forest and in the steppe;

mv̯̌ mbà canine madness; rabies;

mv ku̍saṅ mà ni ntsa’ti màn, à boṅ bo (Pr.) a tail-
less dog cannot wag, thank’ properly = maàn, yn yùm
i ku̍ bo̤ a, bǒ̤ ntsàṅti u, ù lin ni ko e? if a man
who has nothing, gives you pleasure, what does it
mean? § kosaṅ

ma): sediment. coagulation, curd

