– 223 -

n-, t) prenas. variant (before alveolar consonants) of class
prefixes, derived (deverbal) nouns and adèjectives as well
as verb stems: nsun friend; ntuṅ ears; nsovṅ teeth;
Iǎ (n-dǎ) pass, and pass by
2) prenas. variant of p. l.sg. my:
n’to kǎ ba Father, I have come;

n’suṅ nù le mǎ’ṅka I mentioned the matter one more time.

n-, pref. inserted before p. poss. and p. obj. after verbs with
final - : i lùṅγ nà he saved me;
bo kà nà they ordered me to go out;
bu’̤̌ n’ his remainder.

na, n. (a-ma) proverb, intimation; § nnína

na, V. (Pinyin dialect) intimate, doubt.
bo kǎ ni nnǎ na (mbati bati) ṅgâ, ù ma ntěd ntse bo
they were still doubting, whether you had already
arrived.

nǎ, n. pl. bànǎ (à-ba) mother; nǎ mṳ̌ my mother; nǎ ù your
mother; nǎ i his mother; nǎ y̤’ our mother; nǎ yn
your mother; nǎ yàb their mother; nǎ bò our mother
(incl.); but: mâ Sama mother of S., mâ (̇gob hen;
§ booǎ̌mma

nǎ, v. boast.

Nàdzela, n. also: Nà’dzela second born of twin sisters ;
§ Samdzela

nafà’ , n. (ama) farm

Nagbǎ, n. also: Nagwa (à-ba); i) first-born of twin sisters;
2) first-married wife, woman above all;
(Galega II, the father of the present Fońoṅa III, had
36 women, four of them ruled over 32 women; the
name of these four women is ni;nà).

nàli, v. stretch out,. reach out;

nàli yum reach out for an object

nàm, v. go on, go on one’s way;

i nàm màndzi he went on his way.

nǎm, n. farm (rarely used) , field; nǎ ṅgwàfṳd maize field

- 221 -

nama, n. (a-ma) knife with iron handle or haft
nǎmbogd, n. (à-ba) aunt, younger sister of mother

nǎn, v. block up, hinder, close, stop, forbid;
bo nǎn mon le they tie medicine onto the child for
protection against diseases or evil influence;
mà nǎěn nt’sǐ mùn stop someone from talking;
imà nǎn nsà̤̯òm stop the need or lack of s.th.;
i nǎn yab (ṅgâ, bo ma nsuṅ bo̤ he forbade them
to tell; nǎn a the rain kept me.

nâna, adj. also: nnâna intimating, hinting; § nnâna
nǎndù’, n. (a-ma) vinyard, raffia wood, where wine is tapped
nǎnndz̀m, v. bring to a close, end; § nnànndz̤̀m

nanti, v. hinder, give a sign of refusal, mend, repair;
i nanti to’ ni tundǎ i he repaired the holes in his
roof; ; nanti yàb ni bo hae beckoned them.

naṅ, n. (a-ma) hiding place, cave, ambus h;

ù tsi’ bo̤ naṅ γâ’ e? are you lying in ambush here?
i tsi’ nàṅ u is he lying in wait for you?

ṅgàṅ-naṅ bo̤ ta’ ńin: i ko’ ku̯tṳ̯, ni ṅkiti γǎṅṅkòndum
ṅgâ, i yo màndzi, bo ni nto a, nsuṅ mb y bùn
there is one spy; he climbs up a tree and watches
the eneny to see the way in which they are coming;
he then goes and tells his people; § dzab, ṅgàṅ-nanṅ

naṅ, adj. concealed, hidden;
à vo̤ naṅ it got completely lost;
à ts naṅ it has disappeared.

naṅ, v. took; bo narì kědzy they cook a nmeal;
mà naṅ ntad cook or prepare a meal; § kan, lùmti, bubti

nǎṅguka̯d, n. (à-ba) aunt, elder sister of the mother

nǎṅg̀ṅ, n. (a-ma) corn field

nǎṅgwàfuṳ̯d, n. (a-ma) maize field

naṅṅgo’, n. (a-ma) also: ntsnda-ṅgo’ small holes in the ground,
out. of which ants climb;
ṅgo’ bǒ̤ mfṳ̯d, bo kud m ndab ma k̤̍kùn le,

nnebti ntš ndab le, nto’ bo’ masi, ndǎ’ m̌’ ty
sisà. nso madà2i k̤̍kṳ̍n le; à bo̤ ni mfu’mvi, bo ,

na’a, n. pl.

Nà’lela

nd

n.

= 22; =

mbi’ni mà bu’ ty le, mvi bi sǎṅ, ṅgo’ ntum, ni ntso

ma bo’ le, bo kà nebti a; in nti’ ṅgwe, ni
ntu’mug madzi bo’ le, ni nnyṅ ma ṅki’; bo boni ma ndadb,
ṅkaṅ, ṅkwa̤d bpvhen the ants swarm, people put up

a kind of hut where the termites nest is; they make

a hole, get a long stick and dig ist into the hole.

Early in the morning they go and start beating against
the stick; as soon as it is light, the termites come out
and go into the hole which has been made; the drummer
quickly catches them, takes them out of the hole and
puts them in a basket. Then the people return home
and roast and chew them.

bàna’a (à-ba) ass

name of girl born at the time of Lela

teach, show; na’ti, n’dž̤ show so teohat I see.
name of girl born at the time of Voma

also: nèbti make, prepare; circumcize ;

ù kà nèbti yò nù’, à bòṅ you have done that well;

ù nebti tebi ni you made the table according

to measure ;

γǎṅfù ni nnebti fà’ kè ṅgòṅ, the medicine men make’
or protect the farm or the town by laying medicine
here and there to guard against disease, sterility, etc.;
γaǎṅfù ni ndo’ m̌’ ṅgò, ńńǐ’ ma yo, ṅgǒ̤ m̯̌ ma (̇g wa̤n,
ntso madzi fà’, mmi’ti fù le ṅgâ, kědzṳṳ boṅ; γǎṅ-sà

ma nto, ndǎ’ kědzy le bo̤, à ndzo̤ bimo’ bùn ni ndze

sě ma (ì̇gòṅ a the medicine men take some kind of
herb, rub it in a half-calabash then take it to the field
and enter the farm, spread out the medicine, so that the
crop grows well and that the sorcerer cannot enter and
take away the crop, also this is the way people do it
in town.

kind (contemptuous) ;

yò nd ǎ nù, ù ni ndze a, mà mbǎṅ bo̤ that sort of
thing you are doing, is not good;

yò ndǎ mùn ma mbàti ṅgâ, i to ko yum mb mfòn bo̤
such a man should not think that he would get s.th.
from the chief ; § vṡgèni, ṅkèni, mbom, màd

ndàb, n. also: mbob ;i̇kṳ̤ (a-ma) cotton; § ṡkṳ̤̌ ndàb

ndab, n. (à-ba) house; mda à my house, ndǎ ba no, houses;

ma ntsù nda à in ny house;

- 226 -
bo tso mo(̤̌ ndà bab they entered their house =
they reconciled themselves, settled their differences;
§ nda nctoṅntoṅ

ndâbàmbab, n. (a-ma) mouse nest

ndâbàmbàb, n. also: bǎbndab (a-ma) original style of Bali house
gable-roofed house

’

ndàblìmbad , adj. hilly

ndâdzàbndù’, n. (a-ma) small hut to store palmwine

ndâdzṳ, n. (a-ma) stomach

ndâfotì, n. (a-ma) resting room

ndâgàb, n. (a-ma) house of circumcision;
bo bǒ̤ mvi m mu̯mbàṅ, i γǒ gàb if a boy is born,
he is circumcised.

ndâyγṳ̀n, n. (à-ba) guesthouse

ndâkàòd, n. (a-ma) toilet, latrine

ndâ Lèn, n. (à-ba) orig. a group of warriors; now a group of
workers.

ndàlì, n. (a-ma) bed, made of clay ;
bo 1ǎb ndàli they beat” the bed.

ndàliì, n. (à-ba) crowd, heap, mass;
bùn a crowd of people;
ndàli ndzi large bale of cloth;
ndàl bi its fruits (pumpkin) = ndzṳ̤̀;
bo lǎb ndàli they lie in heaps or in big groups.
g ṅk wad

ndàlilali, v. roam about, tramp about

ndàm, n. (a-ma) lie, slander; § ľ̤ṅ, ṅgàṅndàm

ndàm, n. (à-ba) babbler, gossip, tattler;
mà yě ndàm gossip, talk about s o. negatively;
mà yu’ ndàm hear secretly from others;

mà tarṅ ndàm to contrive a plot.

ndam, n. (à-ba) marriage, matrimony

 

= 322: --

ndâm, n. (a-ma) net, wire-netting, iron wire; § mǎ’̇, tam

ndâmandzòṅ, n. (à-ba) social group, age group; § sàmbà

n. (a-ma) great gut (intestine)

ndâmfoòm, n. also: ndâmfom (a-ma) fetish-hut, holy shrine

ndamndàm, adj. climbing, winding; § Iǎm

ndamndàmmṅgam, n. (a-ma) spider’s web; aà kà bo̤ ni; mǎ’ ntsu’,
ndz̤̀d nto mà tso ma nctsàù (̇gam, rṅgam le yo, ṅkud
ntsù ; ni ndǎmndam ist happened on a certain day
that ants came to enter the spider’s door; the spider
saw them and covered the entrance with a web.

ndâmon, n. (à-ba) womb, uterus; § mytàm

ndâ Mṳ̯̀ùkoṅ, (à-ba) warrior’s unit, gang of labourers

ndâmutin, n. (a-ma) community hall, church building

ndâmwěsù , n. (a-ma) fishing net

ndani, adj. clear; § lan

ndâ Ndza̤̯m woarrior’s unit; gang of workers

ndânìnduṅ, n. also: ndândìndurn (à-ba) house of foreigners, as
built by the Bali nowadays, a roof with four sides

adj. pure, clear, bright;
kě ndanka̯d pure, bright things;
ndzi ndanka̯d clean cloth; § an

ndânnòṅnòṅ, n. (a-ma) sleeping room

ndâ Nsi house of the Nsi club;
ndâ Nsi bo̤ ndí f ṅgòṅ, bo ni ntaṅ nù ṅgòṅ madzṳ̌ bo
kab bimo’ fù ma ṅgwa̤n, nnuṅ ma ndâ Nsi, à tèd wu’
the Nsi hut is the towni’s fetish hut; in it they discuss
the affairs of the town; some leaves are picked in the
bush and put into the hut where they remain;
§ ṅgàṅndâNsi, ṅkundza̯mmfòn

ndântàṅ, n. (a-ma) somersault.

ndântsèn, n. (a-ma) urine bladder

s 22s:

ndantu, n. pl. bàndantu (à-ba) lucky person; § moboṅtu

ndaṅ, n. also: ndaṅṅgwa̤d (a-ma) oil-calabash, vessel

ndâṅgo’, n. (a-ma) group of warriors, of workers

ndâṅgṳ, n. (a-ma) sitting room; à ln ma bo i ṅgu ke i ṅko̤’, à
ti bo̤ sa’ bo; à bo l̤’ ṅgomtikad, à ti kù’ni ṅgâ, bn
ntso wu’ mbo̤nmbù bo̤; à bo̤ ndâû( γǐṅ-ndab this room
may be big or small; it is a room of honour; it does
not happen that ordinary people enter there; it is the
owners’s room.

ndâṅgwa̤d , n. (a-ma) small calabash for oil

ndâṅgwa’, n. (a-ma) money-saving club house; bu̯mbaàṅ ni iṅgo̤
wu’ mà ni ṅgwa’ mbi’ nù mà tsi’ ṅkab, nda’ mfx’ m’ fà’
yab m̯̌ men go there to cast’, because they unite in

saving money to start some project later.

ndâṅkun , n. (a-ma) cocoon of a caterpillar; it lives on a thorny
shrub, called ntfsà and bi and is edible.

ndàṅndàṅ, n. (a-ma) also: dàṅdàṅ small drum, held under the
arm when being beaten

ndǎṅni, adj. full to the brim; § (aṅni
ndàṅṳdàṅṳ , adj. also: ndaṅ̤’àṅṳ full; § làṅ, lèṅni
ndâńàìm, n. (a-ma) stable (for horses, cows, goats, etc.)

ndâsa’fàm, n. (a-ma) also: sa ’fàm house with three or four
rooms

ndâsebkě, n. (a-ma) customs office

ndâsun, n. (a-ma) fePriend’s house, friendship

n.. (a-ma) men’s club house in Bafut; they are the
guardians of the town to keep away evil-doers. It is
similar to ndânsi.

ndâtàṅ, n. first floor in a house

ndâtilati, n. (a-ma) small insect (creeping); crawl; § ac;

ndâtsàṅ, n. (a-ma) prison; ndâtsàṅ ľn nn bàyan the prison
is full of thieves; § tesan

 

t

 

= 22 =
ndâtsǒdsa’, n. (a-ma) court-house
ndâtu’nì, n. (a-ma) round house; rather: ndâ (̇gṳ mu γ̤’mu̯
ndâvu, n. (a-ma) khouse of death
ndà’, adv. only, single; y yǎ ndà’ ndzi this is my only dress.

ndà’ndà’, adv. even, just; a ndab wom ndà’ndà there are
only ten houses, just ten;
ndà’ndà’ tsu the literal expression.

nda’, n. (a-ma) portion of s.th., relation to s.th., attachment.
to; y̌ yà nd’ kǎdzṳ, mo’ ku̯ bo̤ this is my portion of
food, there is no more.

ndablì, n. (a-ma) ceremony to ward off evil resulting from the
unfaithfullness of a wife towards her husband; bo
fa fù mboò mṅgwi le ṅgâ, i dzṳ, mbi’ m’ dzaṅ mà wè
i; mǒ’ mò̤ṅg wi bǒ̤ ṅgǒ̤ò, b m’ mg̯mbàṅ, ndǎ’ dzṳm,
ndib i la’ vi mon a, ndu i bǒ̤ ntso ma ndab ṅg wi i ku;
ke ndib i ni nnumti vi a, ndu i bǒ̤ ntso ma ndab, ṅgwi
ku; bo bo̤ mbo̤ fa ndabli mbò mùṅgwi le, ndu
b̤̌ ntso ma ndab, i̇gwi ù ti kù’ ṅku bo̤; yò mbom nù
nd mà ye ndi ò m̌’ ṅka bo̤, mbi’ mvi mǒ̤̤’.
They give a woman medicine to drink, so that no
disease will attack her. If a wife goes and sleeps
with another man, becomes pregnant and when the
time of hâr confinement approaches, and her husband
enters the house, she wmill die, or if she is in travail
and he enters the house, she will die. But if protec-
tive medicine is applied to the wife, the husband can
enter the house and she will not die.

nda̤m, n. (a-ma) wire; mnadambàrṅ copper wire; ndà̯mfufù zinc

wire

nd̀mka̤d , adj. stinking, disgusting odour; § Ǐ̤m

nda̤mľ̤m, adj. put around (scarf, shawl); § la̯m

nda̤gmmbṳûṅ, n. (a-ma) rainbow; mà m nda mmb§̤ṅ to throw a
leaf in the house of a friend on rain days = to beg for
tobacco, colanuts, firewood, food or money; this is

practised esp. by the old men, when it is raining and
they cannot go out.

nddka̤d, adj. heavy; § là̤d

= 3: -

nd̀n, n. pl. là̯n (a-ma) age; à nd̤n it is an old man, lit: it is
his age.

nd̀n, adj. old; nd̤̀m mu̍ṅgwi an old woman; never: mpo§ṅg wi nd̤̀n;
but: nd̤̀m ndzi or ndzi nd̤̀ old dress;
nd̤̯̀m dzaṅ mùn ku’ni mboòo i getting accustomed to
s.th. which may be unpleasant; nd̤̀m o the old snake.

ndebleb, adj. hung over shoulder; bam ndebleb shoulder-bag;
§

ndèbṅgòn, n. (à-ba) young woman, given to the first wife as
a nurse-maid who will be married later; § pà’ sin

ndekùm, n. (a-ma) rattle for dancing

ndàèlilèli , adj. infectuous, contagious ;
nù mbuṳkad i ndalilàli original sin

ndi, adv. also: ndio, ndndi now, today, this day;
nǎ ù b̌d mà to y’ bo̤ ndi e? has your mother
started coming here today?
ṅkǒ̤ ṅgob toṅ la ndi just the cock crowed now,;
Sama to mg la ndi S. has just arrived; § ndindi

ndib, n. (a-ma) also: ndzi sisi black dress;
muṅg wi ni mm’ ndzi ndib ni ndziti vu m̯̌ the
woman is wearing a black dress to celebrate the
funeral with.

ndib, n. 1) time, period; ni nd at the time, when
mu la’ to ni ntsù ndib m, Sara bo̤ vi mṳ̍
at the time when I come, Sara will have given birth to
a boy;
ndib mandz̯̀m later;
ndib bi Iǎ miyà after some time;
lòd’ n ndib le from that time on;
bd ni; ndib dzɑm ba̤d I was killed at the time
of the peace treaty = I received no profit from the
treaty.

2) used to introduce temporal clauses (with clause

final a): ndib, bo kà ma’ ṅgod a, kà to when the
seed was sewn, the birds came.

ndibà’, n. (a-ma) tobacco; ndibà’ we i tobacco made him
dizzy; § eso’

ndìb dzǎmb̯̀d, n. time of the peace treaty

 

=
ndìb fo̤tì, n. time of rest, holiday
ndìb γǒě n. time of farewell, time of starting

ndìb kwǎ, n. (an) ndzù’ time of clearing and cleaning for
everyone at the time of Lela

ndìblùm, n. season (years are counted by that season)
ndiblùm kà lǎ ited three years have passed.

ndìb lu’ tn a, n. hot season
ndìb mbod, n. (a-ma) childhood
ndìb mbṳ̀ṅ, n. rainy season
ndìb mfo’, n. cold season

ndib mvi, n. acge, aeon, eternal, always;

ṅgòṅ ndibmvi me’ always
ndìb nnòṅnòṅ, n. time of sleeping
ndìbntù̯n, n. (a-ma) lifetime
ndìbṅgòn, n. (a-ma) time of virginity, maidenhood

ndìb ṅkà’kǎ’ also: ndìb ṅkà’ṅkǎ’ a fixed time;
ndib ńùm ba̤n a noon time;
ndib ńùm bod a afternoon; about (f. p.m.;
ndib ńù̀m dzkòṅ a midday, l2 o’clock;
ndib ńùm ko’ti a about ? a.m.:;
ndib ṅùm sw a about 3 p.m. ;
ndib ńùm ta̤m ndo̤ṅ a about (I o’clock, noon ;
ndib ńùm tso ma mbad a sunset, about o p.m.;
ndib s’̯mbiyaṅ about une, time of the first peanuts ;
ndib syṅgwàfṳ̯d about july, time of first planted maize ;
ndib tsâmytin time of Ghristian service ;
ndib tsoṅwà’ni begin of school;
ndib tsǒ̤dsa’ time of judgment, sentence;
ndib tummpytin time of close of service;
ndib tumṅwà’ni time of breaking up (school);
ndib womfà’ time of ridge making on the farm,
for second harvest in ugust

ndìkàṅ , n. (a-ma) gun;
ndikàṅ ndz̤̀m ṅgo̤ breechloader;
ndikàṅ ntu’ntu’ carbine;
ndikàṅ vu shooting at funerals;

232: =

mfòn kà kan ndikàṅ vu the chief prohibited the firing
of guns at funerals; § kwakwaàd

ndiko̤, p. interr. when; (o’ ndiko̤ e?’ since when?; tsě ndiko̤ e?
till what time?

ndìmàò’, adv. perhaps; § vṡkàmo’

ndinded, n. (a-ma) mnoise
u mà ndzu’ ndinded i mǎ’ṅka e? did you not
hear his noise again?

ndindi, adv. just now, immediatedly; § kwa’, ndi

ndìndu̯m, n. (a-ma) also: ni’ndu̯m fruit sp. (1-1S cm long) with
coloured skin and sweetish flesh, covered with thin
white skin. The fruit flesh and kernels are crushed
and added to the food; they are also dried and sold in
the market. The kernels can also be used as medicine
against skin disease; they also support the produce of
milk. The fruit looks like esò’ (carthamum); §

ndiṅgwàn, n. (à-ba) also: niṅg wàn hippopotamus
ndiò, adv. now, today
ndom, n. moss
ndòn, n. (a-ma) curse, bad luck;
ndòn tso ni tù i curse upon him;
màn, i ka tṳ̤̇ a, ni mfa ndoòn ma laṅndzù’ wu’
he who hangs himself, throws a curse upon that.
compound; § fenti ndon, tso’ti ṅgâm
ndon, n. (a-ma) request; § lon
ndânlon, adj. requested, begged; § lon, ndon

Ndob region north-east of Bamenda

ndòd, n. (a-ma) willowlike plant of which neclaces are made
for chiefs and mothers of twins

ndòdli’, n. (à-ba) one-eyed person
ndoṅ, n. (a-ma) horn, trumpet, signal whistle ;

ba ka ni ntoṅ ndoṅ le e? ṅgaṅ, à kà ku coes the
father still blow the horn? No, no more (it is dead).

 

 

ndoṅ, n. pl. bàndorṅ (à-ba) sluggard, one that does not like to
work.

ndoṅmbo ,, n. pl. bàndoṅmbo (à-ba) indler, loafer
ndoṅndoṅ , adj. horned
, n. (a-ma) rattle, used in sorcery; §

ndâṅńàd , n. (a-ma) buffalo-horn;
m’ b̤̌ bi γ̤̌ ma nda-ndàù’, n’dǎ’ yǎ vovnhen I
go to the pub, I take my drinking horn with me; § Iǒj̇

n. (a-ma) caeecds, works;
i ku ni ndǎ’mb mi hae died of his deeds;
i ni ndz6â̍ nù ni; ndǎ’mbò mi he is committing
evil with his deeds; § nazèninù

ndo’ndò’, adj. rough (roads, barks, shells, etc.) ;
màndzi bo̤ ndondo’, tèli bo̤ the road is rough,
not smooth.

ndoṳ̀, n. (a-ma) wedding dance, performed by young women;
bo ndo̤̤ they dance the wedding dance.

ndṳ̀, n. (a-ma) young, fresh palmribs, used as a binding material;
§ azaǎṅ nd; to’ ndò̤, sǐd, sěd

ndo̤̤û n. guickness, speed, fast, quick;
n; ndoo̤ quick, hurry; ndo̤ndo̤̤ quick quick;
ni ndo̤ nì ndo̤ auick, fast;
ndo̤ le, mù ni nsa̤̍ni mbo̤ kǎ nsa̤ni s a, ma ndǎ
mommaoàmm bo teoeae race I am doing now and the one
which I have already done, are not going to be in vain;
wo. ṅgab ku ndo̤ ntenten o voel the antilope died
in that race § vsgd, fa, sani

ndo̤m, n. (a-ma) medicine which is. put into the sacrificial bovl,
when installing a new inheritor of the house.
a native doctor gives the medicine (some leaves) ,
called ndo̤m, to the owner of the new house and
he alone washes his whole body with it.
ndo̤m is also given to growing twins to eat, when
they have eaten unripe fruits and the trouble then
stops (fresh maize, the first one; or fresh yam, etc.
can also be applied); § lob

ndo̤m, n. (a-ma) poverty, misery;
n’ tsam ndò̤̤m mi pity his misery.

-

ndǒ̤m abid n. the pool in which wabid alone dared to swim
(the pool of Fosed) .

n. play hide and seek

nd̯̀n, n. (a-ma) vagina (l̤̍ṅ wo̍mti a polite name when a
woman is talking to a man about her private parts;
the actual name is tso’ mu̍ṅg wi) .

ndǒ̤f, n. (a-ma) raffia rib (raphia vinifera); § b’, γǒ̤̌ s,
tso̍ti. wad, won, nd

ndǒ̤̇̍kumndab, n. (a-ma) bamboo for building walls

nď̤ṅladndab, n. (a-ma) bamboo for the inside of a wall, fixed
in a vertical manner

ndṅndù’, n. pl. γǎṅľ̤̇ndù’ (à-ba) tapper of palmwine ;
y mà mbo̤ yǎ mbom ndù’, mu ni ndo̤ṅ a bo̤
this palmwine is not like mine, the one which I am
tapping.

ndǒ̤̇tàṅ ṅgṳ, n. (a-ma) bamboo for the big ceiling on which
the roof will be set

ndo̤tentèn, n. (a-ma) race, competition

ndɑ̌, prp. on, at, from (used only with living things) ;
nd mṳ̌ on me; nd ù on you;
ntà̤ yab buṳ̯’ nd bo they have a bad feeling about them;
à bǒṅ, w sě ndzi’ti nd i you too should take heed
of him;
tso’ mbykad, nswèdka̤ d tum ndɑ̌ bùn bad ulcers
appeared on the people;
nù sìmni nd màùn le unchastity takes a terrible
hold on that man.

nduku, n. (à-ba) strong man with a good appearance ;
Nduku bo̤ mùn nt̤̍nka̤ d ni fà’ mbo̤ mà y nù mboṅkad;
mùn bǒ̤ ni nto mà ti’ a, m̯̌ ntsaṅti mbi’ yi, m̯̌
tsa’ti i ṅgâ, miyà kǎ§, Nduku
Nduku is a strong man at work and is doing well;
if someone comes to see me and I am pleased with
him, I welcome him, saying hello, Ndukut’

ndum, n. pl. dum, bàdum (à-ba) husband
ndu à, yǎ ndum my husband;
ndu Nǎ also: i Nǎ ndum the husband of Na;

= 23 -

ndum, n. pl. dum (à-ba) a voluminous person, a powerful man;
y ńìàm bo̤ kwà’ ndum i this animal is a colossus indeed;
ndum, adj. large, big, mighty, important;
ndum kuńìàm, bàdumkuńìàm large pig;
ndummbi, bàdummmbi (large he-goat:;
ndum mg̯mbàṅ, bàdum buṳ̯mbàrṅ big voluminous man;
ndum nswen, bàdumnswěn nisghty elephant;
p ndumnù the main thing, the important matter; § maânàù;
ndumtyṳ̯ big tree; bo ni ntsa’ti mfòn sě ṅgâ, ’ndumty”
= i wu’, ntsǎ ṅgoòṅ bùn me’ they salute the chief
big tree” , he is bigger, greater than all;
mon le tum ndum màn ti the child has become a big’
man; ndum nù important matter.

ndùn, n. surface, upper part; § nindàùn, kg̯ndùn, mandùn
ndùn. n. (a-ma) smisth’s tools

ndùn, adj. other, different;
m̌’ ntumboṅ, i ndɑò̌n mà mbo̤ tenere is no other
Gospel or Good News;
m̌’ mùn ndùn a different man;
m̌’ nù ndùn another matter;
i bǒ̤ nsuṅ m̌’ nù ndùn, bi kṳ̯ mbim i bim if he
tells you something different, you a̤gree with him
without questioning; § nadzo̤̍B

nduni, adj. full; § un
ndùnlàm, n. (a-ma) anvil -hammer; § mândùn, mndùn

ndɑ̌nndùn, adj. also: nadzṳγ̌’ndzṳ̤’ other, different;
bo bi’ni mà tsu mbom tsu they began to
speak in different languages.

ndɑntu , n. (a-ma) top of head

ndùṅ, n. number, value, esteem, price, cost;
ndàùṅ yab bo̤ mùn kwaàtàdṅgam they are seventy in

number.

ndurṅ, n. (a-ma) vwitchcraft medicine to detect thieves, etc. ;
mà no nduṅ drink that kind of medicine;
Every suspect brings a chicken and medicine is put
into it’s beak; the chicken of the thief will die; then
it is said nduv̇ wě mṳ̯̤̍ nù = the medicine has caught
(revealed) you. If the thief admits it, water will be
sprinkled on his nape and into his eyes and he is

 

bound to pay. Formerly a person who was convicted by

1236

this procedure, lost all his property, including wife and
children (In Mohghamo a death ordeal was aopplied;
the suspect had to drink the poison; if he survived,

he was not guilty, if not, he was guilty and his whole
property, including wife and children was given to the
chief.), § ngo’-nduṅ medicine bag

nduṅ, n. (a-ma) tube; bag, made from the skin of a wild cat.
ndûṅgònndam, n. (à-ba) bridegroom; j (igoòn

nduṅkà’wun, n. (a-ma) bag of wild cat’s skin; § ka’ wun
nduṅmbi, n. (a-ma) bag of goat’s skin

nduɑ̌ṅṅkab, n. (a-ma) price (in money), sum

ndù’, n. (ma) palmwine;
ndù’kǐ̌ palmwine drunk at the death of a husband
or wife who has lost a partner before

ndù’ kòb, n. a poisonous wood that grows in a very crooked way

ndù’ kù̯̍kàṅnì, n. (ma) unstrained palmwine (not clean), said of
affairs not transparent, not evident

ndù’ kùnǎ’, n. (ma) wine of wild date palm

ndù’ ndzumu, n. (ma) old palmwine, strong one, dry wine ;
money’;
i fa lo’ ndù’ iba mbo bo̤̍ he gave us two calabashes of
wine;
bàwukaad ni ṅkoṅ mà no ndàù’ ndzumuṳ̯ old men like to
drink strong wine;
ṅ’ kà γǒ̤ ma Bamenda, mon aà fa ndù’ ndzumuṳ̯ mb m
ṅgâ, nti’ ṅgǒ̤̤ě̌ ni nno I went to Bamenda, my child
gave me some money’, so that I could go and drink;
mon à kěèn a ni ndù’ ndzumṳ̯ ny child gave me some
money; bi ndzumuaṳ̯ dry cola = money;
ndzǎ’ndù’ new wine, the first wine tapped.

ndù’ ṅgwèn, n. (ma) whore wine; the wine which a paramour
offers the woman he wants to seduce, in such a large
quantity that she will forget who her husband actually
is;

ndù’ ṅka (ma) raffia wine; § ṅka

ndù’ sa’ (ma) wine which is drunk at the close of a palaver;

- 23 -
often wine used to bribe the chief and his counsellors
ndù’ (ma) vine from the oilpalm
nd(̯̀, n. (a-ma) border, boundary; maà tsǒ̤d nd̤̤̀ draw a boundar;y;
neg.: ka̯̍ muṳ̯ ntso̤d nd̤̍̌ bo̤ without fixing the boundary;
§ sḋgaṅ-nd̤-ndzu’, mba, dza’, tso̤d, nď̤fà’
ndǔâà’, n. (a-ma) farm boundary; § nad(̤
ndṳlidṳ̯lì, adj. stale, bad tasting

ndṳ̯̀lika̤̯d, adj. sweetish, often disgusting

ndṳ̌m, n. pl. lǔm (à-ba) owl; nadò̤m ni ṅko̤ṅ ni mf̯ńùm the owl
cries at night; it is a nocturnal bird.

ndǔm, n. pl. lǔm (à-ba) , also: vwistch;
ndṳ̌m mbuṳka̯d a bad vwitch.

ndùmka̤d, adj. sweet; § lṳm

ndù̯m, n. (a-ma) tape-worm

nď̤ngòṅ, n. (a-ma) border of a town, country and tribe
n. (a-ma) border of cultivated land

ndu̯’, n. (a-ma) rough, flexible climber with deep blue, bellshaped
flowers; the fruit is called ntammnady’ § k̤b

ndṳ̌lika̯d, adj. twined round, twisted ;
mbo ma bo ndṳ̤̌likad ny hands are twisted.

ndu̯’maākòb, n. (a-ma) climber sp. (with sharp thorns)

ndu̯’mu̯pu, n. (a-ma) tree sp. whose fruits resemble avocado;
the milky sap is used as a medicine against rashes; the
resinous sap of the stem serves to fasten arrow heads

to the shaft.

ndṳ̌ndù̯ , adj. twisted, bent, crooked;
à ṅom, (̇gǒ̤ nd̤’ndo̤’ it is bent and warped; §

ndù̯ ni,. n. (ma) sweat: §
ndzàbù̯, n. oilpalm of the Banyangi

ndzàvù̯, n. reed grass

23; -
ndzàm, n. (a-ma) axe
ndzâm, n. (a-ma) cesinous bark- fibre of the nd(y’mugpo̤̤ -tree
ndzamka̤̯d, adj. many

ndzamu̯, adv. many, very; (old people often say dzamkad);
bùn ndzamṳ̯ many people;
tu bàsogè vaṅ kwà’ ndzamuṳ̯ the soldiers were very
confused; § azam :

ndzàndzǎn, adj. legally married, properly wooed;
à mu̍ṅgwi ndzàndzǎn she is a legally acquired wife;
§ azǎn, sa’

ndzàṅ, n. (a-ma) needle for sewing and for injections;
moa̯̍ ni nta ndzi ni ndzàṅ, I am sewing the dress with
a needle; § sob

ndzaṅ, n. (a-ma) die (game) ;
bo ni mma’ ndzanṅ they cast dice.

ndzaṅ, n. (a-ma) xylophone; musical instrument with wooden
bars, graduated in length according to the solfa system
and vibrating when beaten, calabashes as sounding
bodies; § mǎòndzaṅ̌

ndzaṅ, n. (a-ma) calabash used as a drinking cup ;
ndzaṅ bo̤ mǎ’ ntu’ lo̤’ ndazatn is another kind of
calabash cup

ndzaṅdzaṅ, n. (a-ma) also: dzaṅdzan̤ tree sp.;
tṳ̯ dzaṅdzaṅ ni mbo̤ ma fà’ kè ma kòb tree is
found on a farm or in the forest ;
tṳ̯ dzaṅdzaṅ ni mbo̤ ma (̇kà’ the tree dz.dz. can be
found in a raffia wood.

ndzǎṅfà’, n. (a-ma) part of cultivated land, partitione d by
ditches and paths: f’ yǐ̌ ndzǎṅfà’ work your section,
your plant beds.

ndzǎṅgu’, n. (a-ma) honour, sign of honour, decoration, trophy

ndzǎṅtandzǐ, n. (a-ma) sewing needle

n. (a-ma) ginger, stem, roots and leaves;
à kwà’ ntso̤’ka̯d it tastes very hot

ndzbù̯, n. (a-ma) bàndzb̤̤ rodent sp., gnawer, cutting grass

ndzà̤̯m, n.

ndzà̤m, n.

ndz̤̯̀m, n.

ndzà̤̯m n.

ndž̤m, n.

ndz§̌m, n.

ndza̤m, n.

ndzà̤mkod,

sig: =

following; bofà i ti wa’ ndzà̤n boo̤ itis
impossible that he will abandon following (..;
§ nep’ndzà̤m

(a-ma) cause, reason, responsibility ;

yn ndzà̤m mà tàni, ndzo̤ ikòb bo̤ ndzi’muṳ̯ bàkubàùn a,
bo̤ ṅgâ koo̤ e? vhat is your reason to doubt that

God raises the dead?

Tità Làdyṅa kà dzṳ ndíâ Fokoblab bo̤ ni yǐ ndzà̤̯m kè
ndzà̤m bànǎ i o, à ti bo̤ ndž̤m mfòn bo̤ (ita made
F. heir out of his own responsibility or according to
his mothers, but in no way according to the chief who
was his father.

the last; wa̤ n γǒ̤ ndz̤̯̀m tso̤d all people

have left the farm, the last one passed;

γǎṅ-yγǒ̤ ma ṅgwa̤n γǒ̤ mṳ̍, ndzà̤m tso̤d those who went
to the farm have left, nobod, is left;

bùn ma ṅgwa̤n yǒ̤ mo̤̍, ndz̤̀m tso̤d the people who live
on the farm have gone, noone is left.

(a-ma) second harvest; ndz̤m ; ndzam titi, ta’ tuṳ̯ ńin
tǐ lòb, ku̯̍ dzam bo̤ the second harvest was plenty
(coffee), there was no bush that did not yield fruit;
§ nadza̤m

used as prp. in community with, in favour of, in
accordance to; i bo̤̍d yò sa’ le ndž̤m ndâ bi

he turned the matter in favour of his brothers;

i la’ tso’ti nù yab bo̤ ndž̤n ṅwaà’ni Noò̤ le he will
judge them according to the book of law;

n’ tǎ’ mà dzṳ̯ u miyà ndž̤m Tità I want to get s.th.
from you according to the Lord (Bible).

backside, the unknown, secrecy, slander, backbite ;
bo yu’ ndž̤m mùn le teohe;, listen to the slander
about that person; à yγǒ̤ ndž̤m ko̤̍ki it refers to N.N.

darkness, night; nadza̤m sa̤n mṳ̍ nisgpht has fallen.

n. back of the head, occiput

ndza̤̤m mùn, n. secrecy of man; mà yu’ ndzà̤m mùn listening to

backbiting

ndzà̤mndzà̤̯m, n. (à-ba) posterity, second and third generation;

i yo ndz̤̀nndzà̤m i he has posterity in the second
and third generation.

- fo -

ndz̯̀mndz̤̯̀m, adj. backward, remote, distant ;
i kwe ndz̤̀mndzà̤m he turned away;
i kwe ndz̤̯̀mndz̤̯̀m ni nàù le, i kà t’ mà yě a he

withdrew from the plan, he wanted to achieve.

ndzà̤mntan, n. (a-ma) profit, merit, wages; i dzṳṳ̯ ndz̤̀mntan kwà’
mboòṅka̤d he gained a lot of money; § be, ndza̤m, ntan

ndz̯l̀mnàù, n. background, cause, reason;
i kǎṅ mn ko̤ e kè ndžm n ko̤ e?’ (for what
reason does he like that person?

ndz̤̀mṅgaṅmi, n. (a-ma) nape, back of neck

ndzà’, n. time, moment;
ndzà’ tǎ’ mà I lǎ time will pass;
ndzà’ dza’ mṳ̌ time has passed (to go, etc.), it has
become too late; vi i bo̤ kà bo dza’mu̯̍ her time to
give birth has passed.

ndzà’, n. (a-ma) barb

ndzà’tiìdzà’ti, adj. scattered

ndzà’̯ka̯d, adj., adv. easy, frank;
i lìn mà tsu nadzà̯ka̤d he can speak frankly;
fà’ ni nda ndzà̯ka̯d the work goes on easily.

ndzǎ’ndù’, n. (ma) new palmwine; ndzǎ’ ndù’mu̯̤̍kali new grapewine

ndza’uṳ̯ṅgàn, n. the one who surpasses the crocodile = the person
who is selfreliant, selfconfident.

ndz̯̀d, n. wandering ants ; § ṅġ̤gàṅ
ndza̤m, n. § ndz̤̀nm, ndz̤̀mntan

ndza̤n, n. and prp. (a-ma) other side, beyond, other region;
bà’ ndza̤n the other side, over there;
ndzaâ̍m mò’ beyond; bo sà’ṳ ntsi, ṅgǒ̤ ntsk ma ndza̤n

Perge they crossed the lake and came to the region
of Perge.

ndza̤nndzà̤n. adv. beyond, opposite region;
bà ti’ ndzanndza̤̍n we have separated (there is water

or an abyss between us).

ndzèni, n. (a-ma) work, making

= i -

ndzèninù, n. (a-ma) also: dzèninù ceeds, works;
ndzèninù bab their deeds; § ndǎ’mbo

ndzenk̯̀d, adj. blue, bright, brilliant, liquid;
a ṅgwa̤d ndzenk̤̀(d itis bright oil; § azen

ndzenù, n. (a-ma) deeds, works; § yg, nù

ndzi, n. (a-ma) roise, voice; ndziímùn human voice ; ndzi ntaṅ
trumpet noise; nadzi noise from the grinding
stones; mndzi i saṅ mè his voice is hoarse.

ndzi, n. hunger, longing, craving;
ndzi ṅgṳ̯ v̌ ma (̇gòṅ a great famine came upon
the land; ndzi ni ndzaṅ i he is hungry;
mfa(d i; ni ndzaṅ i he is homesick for his sister
or brother;
ndzi ńd’ , also: i ku ndzi he died of hunger;
ndzi bn longing for milk;
mà la’ ndzi to fast; ndzi yo̤’ ndzaṅ yin mà yo̤ mi my,
ndzo̤̍ ndziì ni ndzaṅ yṳ̯’ s“ a yoau long to see us,
as we long to see you; § nadzi ntsi

ndzi, n. (a-ma) cloth, stuff; dress;
ndzi le fo lae cloth is damp; j fgavṅnadzi, (ntsǎmnd?z;i )

ndzibàṅ, n. (a-ma) red cloth; ndzi bàṅbàṅ purple cloth
ndzigolàbè, n. splendid, gorgeous gown
ndzikà , interj. thank you

ndzikad, adj. bitter; (cassava) bo̤ mbom iba, m’ bo
; ndzika̯d there are two kinds of cassava, one
is the bitter one.

ndzika̯d, n. (à-ba) the one who knows;
i bi suṅ, m’ bo̤ ndzika̯d when he said it, I already
knew it; i ndzika̯d ni; nù le he knows about it;
mà’ti, m nazika̯d leave it, I shall remember.

ndziko̤, interj. truly, if we had known;
ndziko̤, mbǒ̤̍ bo kǎ mà mvi yò màùn le bo̤ tuu, if
one would have known, one would not have given
birth to this man.

ndzimfòn, n. (a-ma) royal gown;
ndzi mmà’mǎ, i fufu, ndzi bi fufu a white
coat, white coats ;

s -

ndzi mùn human dress;
ndzi ndankà̤̯d clean dress;
ndzi ndamlam (loincloth, wrapper.

ndzindzi , adj. without a break or halt;
bi la bin ndzindzi you passed without stopping,
without calling.

ndzindziì, n. fly

ndzindzmu’, n. smoke; tǎntsa’ smoke from burning
bricks

ndzinsòsǎ, n. (a-ma) narrow dress, trousers, stockings

ndzinsùmsum, n. cover, veil; b̤̍wi bòroro boà bò̤wi hàusa ni
nsum ndzi ni tù yab the Bororo women and the
ausa women cover their heads.

ndzintàmtam, n. curtain
ndzintsi, n. thirst; § nadzi

ndzintùm, n. (a-ma) big gown to put on (like Fonsàò’ and other
chiefs in Mbu’ndam); mà we’ ntùm to put on that
gown; mfoòn Nso’ koǎṅ mà we’ ndzintùm; bo ni ṅgwe’
the Nso-chief likes to put on that gown;
they fix it to the lower body; the top is open.

ndziṅgà , interj. of surprise or anger about s.th. which did not
happen or was not done; often connected with bofà
ndzo̤̍ l̤’ sǔǐd meè a, nadziṅgâ bofà bi ti kani miyà e?
as the weather is bright, can you not go fteor a little
walk?
ndziṅgâ, n’ ti mà nsuṅ ṅgâ, ù dzǒ̤’ ndab bo̤, (bofà) ù
ti dzo̤’§ e? can you not sweep the house, even if I do
not especially tell you to?
ndziṅgâ, bofà ù ti ṅà̤ yò yum le e?’ can you not pick
up that thing? § vṡ’go’ (used in affirmative sense)

ndziṅkab, n. covetousness, avarice, lit. ’hunger of money’

ndziṅkṳ̀, n. (a-ma) expensive stuff, tissue; it is said that only
sons of chiefs are allowed to wear it, because with
ordinary people lightning would strike the house.

ndzi ṅkwànkwàn, n. small loincloth, drawn between the legs and
fastened to a belt at the back;
ndzi ṅwà’ striped cloth ;

s :

ndzi silk silk cloth;

ndzi sòbn mourning dress;

small loincloth (back part); § su’ndzi, kwàò̤ti;
ndzi vu naourning dress.

ndziti, n. beginning; § ṡkuṅ

ndziì’tì, n. end; ndzi’ti nsi the end of the earth;
ndzi’ti lùm bu ti bo your years have no end;
ndzi’ti nù end of the affairs, things

ndzo, n. (a-ma) house in which medicine is drunk

ndzo, n. (a-ma) cetbt, credit;
ndzo à nd ù you owe ne ss.th., lit. my debt or my
credit is on you;
ndzo ù bǒ̤ mbo̤ nd i, mbo̤̍ ṅ’ko̤ mgṳ̍ bo ndzo in case
he owes you s.th., I shall pay it.

ndzòm, n. (a-ma) curse, curse oneself (as an oath);
dǎ ni mfa ndzàm mbàò the grandfather passes
on a curse to god (he hands over the case to god) ;
dǎ ni mfa ndzòm mbò le bo iṅgâ, i ni ntsa’ti
ńìkòb, nt’ ṅgâ, ńikòb yemti i the grandfather passes
on a curse to god; which means, he is praying to god
that he may help him; §

ndzondzì, n. (à-ba) wale

ndzoloṅmbuṳ̯, n. (à-ba) (small black) bird sp. which eats the
fruits of the Mbu-tree; à koṅ mà dz’ṳ̯ mbuṳṳ tt likes
to eat the fruits of the Mbu-tree.

ndzòṅ, n. ambush, guard; maà lǒ̤m nadzoṅ lie in wait for;
i bi yu’ nɑ̌ ndzoṅ le, swèd we i, i nti’ mbo’ bo’ as he
heard of that ambush, he was terrified.

ndzòṅ bì, n. thick, edible skin of colanut;
m̌’ ndzàṅ bi ni ndṳ̯m mà kwa̤d; bi bo ni yγà’ bi iba, i bà’
ku̯mvi bo̤ ndzoṅ bi, i bà’ madz bo̤ γa’ bi; mǎ’ γa’ bi wu’,
bo fun ile’ ni mboòm bi, yi, à ni ṅkobti bi itàn kè intu’
kà kwàtad me’ a another cola skin is sweet to eat,
in fact the cola has two skins, the outer one is the
thicker cola skin, the inner one is the finer skin;
there is a cola shell, it is called a cola husk; it holds
five or six or even seven nuts; § nadzo’ bi, vulò’ndab

ndzoṅ,. n. (a-ma) thorn; maà tcso’ ndzoṅ ndɑ̌ mùn exctract a
thorn from s.o., remove lack of s.th.

= 221 =

ndzoṅ ndab, n. (à-ba) snuffer, spy, traitor of his house companions;
ndzoṅndab bǒ̤ nsòb u, ù ti kwe bo (Pr.) if your
house-companion hates (stabs) you, you have no
chance (you will not return home); § vu’o’ndab

adj. thorny
ndz’, n. (a-ma) cancerous sore (not the same as ctso’)

ndz’ bi, n. thin, not edible skin of cola nut; it lies under ndzoòvn bi;
People throw dice with five nuts; whichever way they
fall or lie, signifies s.th. special; if the straight side
of the nut looks towards you, it is called sǒbtu, i.e.
there is s.th. against you; if two nuts with the straight
side combined come to lie before you, it means good
luck, you will get s.th., perhaps your wife will become
pregnant; if two nuts come to lie the same way, you
will be lucky, it means ? tsi ni Ioṅ mborṅka̤d you sit
on a good chair. If two nuts have their round side
facing each other, it means bad luck , d tsi ni
mbuṳ̯ka̯d you sit on a bad chair; § nazoṅbi

ndz̤, 1) adv. how, as; à ndzo̤̍ ù kà suṅ a as you had said;
used for comparison: i tg̤’ ba i heis as strong
as his father (with clause-final a).

cj. introducing a concessive clause: as, if, though, just
as; ndzǒ̤ ńùm ni nta titin a, l̤’ tǎn ndiò mè as the
sun is shining very much, it will be very hot today.

2

so

ndzo̤ prenas. form of yo̤
ndzṳ̍b, n. (a-ma) small rodent sp.
ndz̀m, n. (a-ma) dream; ndzo̤mn tfsà’muṳ̯ nà a dream troubled me.
ndz̀m, n. (a-ma) seed, semen, sperma (of man and animal)
ndzǒmbi, n. (a-ma) sheep
ndzo̤nik̀d, adj. transparent; bo̤wi ni ṅkobti tù yab ni
ndzi ndzo̤nikaà̯̯̀d the ausa women cover their head
with a transparent veil.
ndż, n. (a-ma) bell; bo ni mbu’ ndzo̤̍ṅ they ring the bell; § tamndzo̤ṅ

ndzo̤ṅ, n. (à) niggardly behaviour

ndzo̤ṅmvuṳ, n. (a-ma) dog’s bell; kuńàm mà ni ndzu’ ndzo̤ṅmvṳ̯ bo̤

 

- 21sS -
(Pr.) game exposed to death does not hear the dog’s
bell; one who is near to death, does not listen to
advice.
n. (à-ba) eyewitness; § v̇gaṅndzǒ̤no, keèndzo̤̍vo̤, yo̤
ndzo̤’ndzǒ̤, n. maize-hair around the cob

ndzo̤’nìdzo̤’nì, n. slope ; Io̤’ ndzo̤ nidzo̤’ni slightly rising slope

ndzò̤̤̯dzo̤’ṳ̀, adj. rising slightly ;
mo mbad nazo̠’̤dzo̤’ṳ̤̯ slightly rising hill

ndzù, n. (a-:ma) big bean, similar to peanut; they are mixed

with peanuts and pepper.
ndzumṳ̯̀, adj. also: ndzummu̯ dry, meager ; § dzum
ndzûûndzun, adj. bougnht ; § ndzûûndzun
ndzuɑ̌ṅà̤, adj. red; nazṅ̤̤ mbàb ceddish rat, living in water

ndzù’, n. (a-ma) compound; rmnadzuâ’ a my compound;
ku̯ ndž’ a in my home ; k nazù’ bin in your (pl.)
home; § mdo naz?’, laṅndzù’, ndzṳ̌ěṳhdzù’

ndzu’, n. medicine from the bark of tg nadzu’ (medicine tree) ;
the bark is scraped off and then smoked with tobacco
to guard against pneumonia and filaria.

ndzù’ṅwà’nì, n. school compound
ndzu̯ndab, n. pl. dzṳndab (à-ba) haeir, heir of the house

ndzuṳńa’, n. dzṳńa’ or yǎṅndzṳńa’ (à-baa-ma) body guard of chief;
garden eggs ; ṅ’kà yo mo’, i ndzid bo ndzyṳńa’ i, dzoṅ
bo̤ ndzṳńa’ mfòn . I saw someone , he was walking
with his bodyguard; adzoṅ was his guard;
ṅgàṅ-ndzṳńa’ ln mà dzyṳńa’ a body-guard may eat.
garden eggs.

ndzù̯’, n. (a-ma) seed of pumpkin (medicine’ against protasta
trouble)

ndzù̯’, adj. also redupl.: ndz̤’ other, different one;
ù ndzṳ̤̌’ndz̤’ another one, a different one;

bùn ndz;§̤â’ other people;

ndzu̯’, n. (à-ba) root-stock, race, kindred; § vṡǩ̤ndzṳ̤̀’, ṅkṳ̌ṳhdab

ndzṳ̌ mon,

ṅk̤̍ndab, i ndz̤’ a different family;
ntsibàṅ, i ndz̤’ different blood; § ndùn, mo’

n. pl. dzo̤̍’ bon (à-ba) nurse, guardian, tutor ;
ndzṳ̤̌’ bò our tutor; bà bon we care for the
children; § dzyṳ

ndzṳ̌ ndzṳ̀ , adj. other, different, sometimes;

ndzṳ̌’ni, n.

ndzw’ǎ, n.

ni nd ndzṳ̤̌’ndz̤’ ’ rom time to time, sometimes;
ni mbom nàù ndzṳ̤’ndž̤’ in manifold ways.

(ma) also: ndṳ̤̌’ni sweat;

fi u you are sweating;

ndzṳ̤̌’ni nanti ndǐù ù sweat exudes from you, you are
sweating; i kǒ̤ ndž̤’ni or: i kǒ̤n ndz̤’ni he wipes off
the sweat.

pl. bàndzwǎ (a-ma) water buck

ndzwilidzwilì , adj. also: nts weèlitswàli feoeble, weak;

nèbti, v.

mbùm à ni ndzwilidzwili lò’ ni mbǎ’mbà’, à tsi ndzo̤

kè a to wě mfo’ wè a o Since this morninsg I feel
weak, I think I am getting a cold; yo mon mà ndn

mà fà’ mboṅka̤d bo. i tsweli ti, i kà̯ t̤n bo̤ this child
cannot work properly, it is weak and has no strength;
ṅkù (soup, like okro) ge, à ti tàṅ bg, à bo̤ ntsweli-
tsweli he is squeezing or pressing the sik, but it will
not harden, it remains soft; § ndzwilikad, tsweli

also: nti make, prepare; circumcise; § nàbti

nì, copulative particle in the sense of it is, being’

only with the independant form of p.:

ni; mǔ̯ with me, ni wo with you;

i fuṅ bùn, ni mṳ̍ sǎ, ni wù s hae calls the people, me
too, also you;

1) used in a prop. sense: with, in, at, on, from;

1ǎ ni yò màndzi pass this way; i tsi nitu mfad i

he represents his brother;

ni, aspect marker to denote the continuous form (placed after

-ni, suff.

the tense marker and always followed by the prenas-
form of the verb) ;

mu̍ ni ṅgo ma ntan l am going to the market.

to derive reciprocal and associative verbal stems;
kòṅni love one another (from kǒěn);

bàni hate one another (from bn);

dzṳ̯ni eat together (from dzy).

22

ni mi’ ṅgoòṅ bùn me’ in the eyes, in front of all people;
ni bǎ’ bo lum on the right side;

ni; b’ bo ko̤b to the left;

nd nsà’ ni mf̯ńù’m during the day and at night;

n; mǒ’ ṅkù’ on the day before yesterday, some days ago;
ni mfommvi ibe’ = ni mǒ’ mfommvi on the day after
tomorrow, some other day;

n;’ mbońùm in the evening;

ni ntš mutsàṅti leisure time, about six o’clock;

ni ntsǐ ndib mè at the time of (in the following year);
ni ṅkwe ṅg wa̤n at the return from work (ca. four or
six o’clock) dddd;,

ni; ntgṳ̯ in unanimous, with one heart;

i ni mbati ni nt̤̍ i he thinks with his heart;

bo kà ta i ni ked they shot him with an arrow;

nindoo̤ quick; ni tn with power;

bo fuṅ i ni mù mbyṳka̯d they took him for a bad man;
bùn ntsabti ni le the people
blasphemed God because of a hail-storm;

i kà bo̤ mǎ’ màùn ni ṅgo̤d Sem hae is descended from
the race of Sem;

bo kǎ l̤̍ṅ ti ni Marko they called him Marcos.
2) used as cj. and;

bo kà yγǒ̤ ma ntan boà nǎ mṳ ni mfa̤d i s ny feather
went to the market with my mother and also with

my sister;

i 1ǎ’ ndzun mbi ni ṅgob ma ntan he bought a sheep
and a chicken at the market,;

(by’. bu’a: bi. bià: bo. boà is often used instead of ni)
nì mǒ̤’ṅkù’, adv. day before yesterday
ni mṳ̯ § nini ny senior brother
niγ wâmbe n. § niwombè
niγwû̍bmbè bà’ni war slaves of the Bali:; § mniwo̤̍mmbè
nimbàṅ , n. uncle
ninǎ, n. (à-ba) main wife, ruling wife: § nàgb
nìndo̤, adj. also : nìndo̤ndo̤ fast, quick; § ndo̤
nindṅ, n. (ma) heaven, sky: kgṳ̯ mnindo̤ṅ in heaven
nindùn, prp. on, upon, lit. nm-ndùn on surface ; it is only

used with p. poss.;
ndab tsi nindùn ts̤̍ i the house rests on its foundation;

:

i kd ntsi nindùn k be he pours water on these things;
yo tundàb le boà buysuṳṅ nindùn t this roof and the
birds on it: § kpgndùn, mandùn, ndùn

nìndu̯m fruit sp., §

nini, n. pl. banini (à-ba) elder brother:; nini ù your elder brother;
nini i his elder br.; nini y̤’ our ealder br .;
but: ni mu̯̍ ny elder brother;
bàni mṳ̀ ny elder brothers;

bànini y̤̍’ our elder brothers.
niṅgwan, n. (a-ma) also: nd ṅgwan hippopo tamus
nìṅko̤ṅ, prp. beside; niṅkoṅ tù i beside his head; § ikoṅ
nɑ̌ṅkɑ̌’, adj. yesterday; nǒ̌ku ṅkù recently, some days ago

nìtu, prp. on behalf of, instead of, for;
à b̌ṅ ù fuṅ bed nietu Petro please, call bed instead
of Petro;
i kù’ ṅgǒ̤ ma tisòṅ nitu mfoòn he goes to the government
again for the chief;
bo fàbsuṅ nitu bà uda they told lies about the jews;
esu kà bim vu nitu ṅgoòṅ bùn me’ jesus died for all.

nitùn, adv. eagerly, able, with effort, with power ( ni-to̤n);
i kà ts ma oma. ntà’ a nit̤̍m hae arrived in ome
and looked for me eagerly.

nitùnnitùn. adv. with great zeal or power

n. pl. bàniwâmbè (= niy wââmbà), (à-ba) tributary, subjects ;
bàSiria kà bo niwâmbè bǎoma the Syrians were
oman subjects; § niy

nnâna, v. sisgnify, indicate, intimidate; § esu nnââna; nana

nnàndzà̤̯m, adj. last;
vo nnàndz̤̀m yo̤’ this is our youngest, last born;
y nnàndzà̤m bòn ba these are my last-born children.

nnâṅnàṅ, adj. boiled, cooked ;
ntò nnâṅnàṅ bǒ̤ nně̌ṅ, mbubti, à tsàṅ if cooked food
is left, it spoils and looses its taste.

adj. potable: k nno̍no beverages; i esi’ kědzṳ ko̤̍̌ tsi’ ntsi
nno̍mo e?’ does she serve a meal without offering water?

- 21 -

nnòṅnɑ̌̌ṅ, adj. sleeping; § nǒṅ, ndânnoòṅně̌ṅ

nov:

drink, taking part in the drinking club;

i no nduṙ be drinks the medicine of theft;

kùm le ka ni nno e’ à kà ku coes the drinking
club still exist? No, it is dead ;;

i no tù a it. he drinks my head, fig. he gives me
trouble; bo ni nnoka̤̯d kùm they drink at the club.

no faṅgǎṅ n. excessive drinking; mn ò ni nno faṅgàṅ ti this

man drinks too much.

no ndibà’, v. smoke

noni, v.

nɑ̌ṅ, v.

nɑ̌ṅndab, n.

drink again and again

sleep, live, dwell, lie, be old, remain;

bo masi wǎṅwàṅ ma they sit down in
a group on the grass;

i něǎṅ masi, mfǎ’ fà’ i hae does his work with great
effort; i ňòṅ kobkoòb hae ies flat on his face;

i ňṅ ku̯’ǩ̤’ ae ies on his side;

i ňṅ ṅkwatikwati ba lies on the side;

a nɑ̌ṅ dzandzan it lies open, it lies on its back;

i nɑ̌ṅ lùm kwàṅgamm heis forty years of age;

mfòn ko’, nně̌ṅ ndɑ̌ màùn, ko̤̍ bim fa i bo̤ telae chief rises
and covers the refugee (or criminal) with his power;
he does not deliver him;

mà b mùṅgwi sleep with a woman;

i ňṅ ṅko̤̍ hae stays a bachelor; § nnoṅnɑṅ

(a-ma) the whole possession, situation;
yǎ ňṅndab ku̯ mbo̤ ta’ sili ò na possessions are just
a shilling’s worth.

nɑ̌̌ṅndâ mùn n. (a-ma) the situation of a man;

nò’ni, n.

yǎ nǎṅndab bo̤ ṅgâ, mon ma ni (ṅko̤ṅka̤d ma ndzu’ a bo,
mbi’ ntǎ’ ṅgâ, mon tsi ni bon? in my case a child
should not cry in my compound, because I wish that
a child lives in peace;

yǎ noǎṅndab bo̤ ṅgâ. mbo̤ mbi no ndù’, mbo̤ dzṳ kědzy
ṅkuṅ uassaonally eat before I drink wine.

habit, custom, agreement.;
a mà mbo̤ yǎ noò’ni bo it is not my habit.

2: =

nò’ni, v. agree upon, fix up, promise;
bo nàò’ni nù teohey agreed upon s.th. ;
bà noni ṅgâ, bǎ to fǎ’ mfommvi ve agreed to work
tomorrow; § ka’

nò’ò, n. law, rule; § no ̤
nò’ti, v. arrange in piles, lay alongside
nu, n. law, order, habit, usage, commandmaent:;

noòd̤̍ ṅgòṅ ocrder of the country;
nòd’̤̤̌ Mose commandments of Moses;
noòd’̤ kòb statutes of God.

found, establish; bo no(̤ ṅgoòṅ they found a town;

ned
(B-
c’

i

bo nod’̤̤̌ ntan they establish a new market;

bo mà nnoò’̤̤̌ bò yab masi bo̤ they would not rest;

i noòd̤̯̍ ndzù’ i be establishes his family household, he
will become wealthy; i nod̤ ndzi tèbi he puts the
table cloth; mi’ mi bi’ni ma no ṅgòṅ bi his face
begins to get wrinkled.

nò’̯̀ tu à ny bosom fFriend
nsàdka̤d, adj. strong, fit, kind, fresh

nsa̤̯m, n. terench, ditch in a fortification

nsânnsàṅ, n. tooth splitter, a man who professionally files or
incises teeth; § san, nsòṅ

nsànsan, adv. in public, publicly
nsansan, adj. split; i lo’ ṅkwin nsansan he took split firewood.
nsaṅnìka̤d, adj. polite, friendly

nsà’, n. day, daytime (between ll-?2 hrs) ;
ni; nsà’ ni mf̯ńù’m by day and by night

nsa’, n. animal’s nest

nsa’, n. also: sa’ palaver, news; ns’ mà mbo̤ = sa’ mà mbo̤
there is nothing, no news, no palaver

nsa’ mbab, n. reat’s nest, rat-hole

ns̀n, n. a small beetle which pierces holes into calabashes

 

-=2si1 -

ns̀n, n. small holes pierced by small beetles;
mà nǎn nsà̤̯ supply a want

nsa̤̯n mbaṅ, n. the black crust around the cooker; they mix it with
palmoil and rub it into decorative cuttings on skin,
in order to achieve scar ornaments or tattoos.

nsěd ndzi, n. small pieces of cloth or remainder of cloth
nsèniǩ̤d, adj. clean, neat, tidy; § seni

nsi, n. earth, gnome; nsi wàti the earth shakes;
nsi we i mfa ù the gnome has caught him and brought
him before you; § masi , ntsa’si

nsi, n. wind, flatulence; § si

nsibàṅ, n. hell, tartarus, abode of a departed evil spirit;
§ ṅgoṅ

nsibo, n. pl. nsimbo (a-ma) finger; hand of a watch, clock;
nsibo ṅgu̯, pl. nsimbo bi ṅguṅgṳ̯ thumb

nsibo ṅko’, pl. nsimbo bi ṅko̤’ṅko̤’§ the little finger;
i w fà’ i bo̤ n; tu nsimbò mi he is only working
with the tip of his fingers;
nsibo màùn ni mbi sob 1i ci, mbo̤ fěn fǎn if one’s
finger hurts one’s own eye, it happens by mistake =
one does not do it intentionally.

nsikù, n. also: sikù, pl. nsiṅkù (a-ma) toe,;
nsikù ṅgu̯, nsiṅkù bi bisg toe, big toes;
nsikù ṅko’, nsiṅkù bi ṅko̤’ṅko̤’ little toe, little toes.

nsom, n. plant sp., the juice of which causes sneezing; the Bali
use it to pour into the noses of their setters, in order
to make their scent keener, so that the dogs hunt well,
become failerce.

nsòṅ, n. pl. of sàòṅ teeth; § nsâínmnsoòṅ
nsǒṅγù, n. friend
nsàòṅù̯sòṅṳ

bond

adv. at a distance, far off;

i tsi hae stands at a distance, keeps away.

nsòsoɑ , adj. suitable for dressing;

kùm nsàsǎ mastk to cover a dress with; only applied

on narrow articles of dress, such as trousers, stockings,
;

nsò’ , n. seed, sperm; young plant, brood;
mo ns’ some seed; nsò’ bùn a lot of people;
nsò’’ mùn the youngsters; nsoò’ boṅkṳ̯ a lot of children;
ns’ ndbà’ tobacco seed;
nsò’ mfu’fu’ the tobacco seed sprouts ; § ṅgo̤d

Nsò’, n. land inhabited by the tribe of the same name, about
1o.3 - l degrees E and 6.os N

nsò’, adj. fine, pretty

nso̤nńàm, n. (Bameta) elephant

nso’, n. also: nsu̯’ tartar, scale
ntsṳ̍b, n. sign of warning, magical sign

nsù, n. dropsy; msù we i be became dropsical

ṅgwi i nu̯ṅ nsù nd i, mbi’ndzo̤̍ i Iǎ’ moǎ’ mg̯mbàṅ, bo i
nòṅ mandùn kun ndu i a; dzaṅ wě ndu j le ni ndib, i
nǎṅ bo ṅgwi i mǎ’ ṅka a i It was his wife’s fault that
he had elephantiasis, because she took another man
and slept with him on the bed of her husband; the
disease befell her husband at the time, when he slept
with her again.

nsu, n. pl. bànsu ifish;

nsu ni nto̤d ma ntsi the fish is proud and careless
only in water, out of the water, his pride collapses ;
§ la’nsu

nsun, n. pl. sun, bàsun (à-ba) fèPriend, friendship;
bo i kà tso sun they made fPriends; nù sun friendship;
nù sùn yab their friendship; § tǎndaà

nsunṅkad, n. pl. sunṅkad fellow traveller; nsunṅkad Tità esu
a friend of the Lord jesus; a person who likes to listen
to the preaching of the Gospel, but who does not
become a member of the church through baptism,
because of polygamy.

nsu’ndab, n. filling or panel for the housewall skeleton, consisting
of bamboo or the ribs of raffia vinifera

nsɑ̌’làm. n. bellows; bo bo̤ ntǎn tṳ̯n ma mu làm, bo bini mà s’ ni

 

=

nsɑǐ̌’làm when they heat the iron in the forge, they
start working the bellows; § làm

nsuṳ̯n, n. distress, difficulty, need, shame;
ko a ko ( am ashamed;
ko a mbi’ ṅgàṅ ṅgo̤’ Inast pity this suffering man;
nsg̯m mùn o ko a teoe misery of this man overcomes me.

nsu̯’, n. partnership, cooperation, joint work;
b’ ù tsoâ vwe join together to work;
bo mà kud ndab joined together to build
a house; (i’gǒ̤ mà kǒ ̯ fà’ I went to return my
part of the joint work; bi ma ntso ns’ kǐ̌dzid bià
γàṅ-yě-nù mbuṳka̯d bo̤ co not join with evildoers
intimatedly; bà tso ns’ tet us cooperate ;
bo ni nmnuyṅ nsuṳ̯’ ni fà’ ma ṅg wa̤n they eat round in

turns = every time another one has to provide the food;
§ sy’, wan

nsu̯’ kùk̤̀n, n. small, wingless termites; § sy’ ṅgod’

nsu̯’, n. splinter of a raffia rib, used to plait baskets;
bo ni mba’ (̇ki ni nsṳ̯’ they plait a basket with raffia
splinters; § wà̇ ns’

nsu̯’nika̤d, adj. terrible, dreadful;
ù mù nsy’nika̯d you are a terrible man; § nswedka̤d
kě ns nika̯d

nsu̯’ṅgo’, n. pl. su̯’ṅgo’ a maggot of the wingless termite which
lives together with the winged termite; § go’

nsu̯’ṅka, n. fibre, thread, string from the lower part of the
raffia rib; § nsuṳsy. ṅka

nswèdkad, adj. frightful, dreadful;
nù nswèdka̤̯d mà mb̌̌̇ bo̤ a cdreadful affair is not
good; § swěd, nsy’nika̤d

nswen, n. pl. bànswen elephanst; yo la, ntùṅ mi ndzo̤̍ ntɑ̌ṅ nswen
look, his ears are like an elephant s ears; nswen ni
ntoṅ ni lòd i an elephant blow s with its trunk.

nswimbi, n. the only remainder;
nswimbi lòb ńin also: ns wimbi tum ta’ ńin only one
remains.

nswinswi, adj. odd, uneven (of numbers);

itàn bo̤̍ taṅ nswinswi fealnve is an odd number;

- 2s1 -

i fǐ’ ṅgoṅ-fà’ le bo̤ nswins win, mo’ sà’, mo’ kà̀nti, à ka̍
tsini bo he makes uneven farm-beds one is long,
another is short, this is not correct.

ns wisw , adj. descending, coming from above;

nswi’, n.

vu ns wis wi descending death = a quick death;
vu ṅkǎ̌’kǒ’ also: i mà (̇ku nindo̤ bo̤ a slow death;
màndzi nswiswǐ’ a descending road; § s w

fibre from the raffia leaves, used to weave bags, etc.;
bo ni mba’ bàm bo ni nswi’, y, à Ǐ’ ni; vaṅ ṅka a they
only weave bags with the fibres of raffia leaves;

bo ni mfa van, ṅka, ntso’ nswi’ mu, ni nswin, ni ndza’ni
ni ńùm, à dzum, bo lòd’, mba’ bàm m̯̌ they bring raffia
leaves, pick out the fibre, dry it in the sun, and then
they weave a bag with it; maà swim the fibre out of a
leaf ; § sw

nswi’ dzwendzwen, n. fibres, twisted bast;

nta, n.
ntab, n.
ntad, n.
ntàd, n.
ntàli. n.
ntàm, adj.

bǎae tà̯m yb kad ni nswi’ dz vwendzwen the people of
Ve plait their head pad with twisted fibres; § dzwen

length of, measure, bunch; nta i sì’sà a long nasty
fellow; nta bo span of hand, also: fathom;

nta ṅkwin a long log of firewood, cord- wood;

nta ndo̤̤ also: mba̤̍n ndo̤ a bunch of young raffia stalks;
also the whole length of a single raffia stalk; § ntabo,
ntantarṅkù

granary, store; bo ni nmnyṅ ṅgwàfṳ̯d ma ntab, ni ntsi
mbiyaṅ bo̤ ku̯tàṅ they put the maize in the granary,
groundnuts are stored above the ceiling.

dinner, meal, banquet; ntad koṅn; love feast;

ntad ndab a maeal prepared for all the workmen who
had assisted in building the new house;

§ ntad ṅgonndàm marriage feast

fathers; ntàd mab, ntàd min their fathers, your fathers
hall, veranda

single (used in connection with long things);
ntàm ńǐṅtu a single hair;

ntàm (ìǩ̤kab a single boot-lace;

ntàm a single thread;

ntàm mba’ a single braid of hair.

=2 ;; =

ntam, n. fuit (a-ma)

t̯ ò le ni ndza̤̯mm ntàm mi tree bears its fruit;
kab ntam ty ò le poick these fruits;
ntam sàndzàb black berry of the sandzab vegetable;
ntam kàsyrṅga cassava fruit ;
ntam ndṳ̯’ liama fruit.

ntambo, n. pl. ntammbo fathom; § nta

ntamuṅkù, n. pl. of ntamkù step, pace

ntamtàm, adj. (grasp or catch) from either side by bending the
arms; bo we i ntfamtàm tohey caught him with their
arms.

ntan, n. market, market place; ntfan sǎṅ m(̯̍ the tradesmen have
gone; bo ni ṅga̤n ntan they are trading; mà be ti ntan
to sell again with a profit; retail business; § ndzò̤̯m ntan

ntan Bayàm n. trade with exhorbitant prices

ntanbèd , n. gambling grounds, place for dice-gambling

ntandze’, n. name of former market place, situated in the Bo’

ntànì, n. doubt; § tcàni

ntanko’̯ ma Ba’ni n. the present market place

ntanntàn, adj. widespread, lying apart, dispersed;
a inà mbo rìgoòṅ, à ně̌ṅ ntǎnntàn a bo̤ tit is not a town
which is spread out;
bo bi ṅgwàfṳ̯d ntanntàm they: plant maize wide apart.

ntantaṅkù, n. Mr. Longlegs, longlegged fellow; § nta i sisà

ntantasṳ̯̀’, n. playground

ntàṅ, n. wind-instrument, trombone, the king’s trumpet;
m̌n o ni ntoṅ ntàṅ, this man plays on the trombone.

ntaṅ, n. intention, plan, purpose;
ntaṅṅgoòṅ kwe’ni also: a mà mbùmti bo̤ teone country’s
power is decreasing; § ṡko̤ntaṅ

- 2§s6 -

ntaṅ, n. (a-ma) excuse, justification, defence, subterfuge;
i ko̤ ntàṅ mi be excuses himself.

ntaṅtsù, n. talker, tattler, a person always ready to talk, but
not to work; mugsyṅ-tfsù mà ni ṅkud ndab bo̤
a talkative bird does not build a nest (Pr.).

ntàṅka̤d, adj. strong, tough; § carn

ntǎṅṅkù, pl. of ntǎṅkù (a-ma) the hollow of the knee

ntǎṅ ku’, n. blossom of colocasia

ntaṅntsà̯m, n. treacherous plan; § nts̯̀m, tan

ntaṅṅgòṅ, n. governor’s authority

ntǎṅò’, n. also: ntxǎṅṅò’ raven, crow

ntàṅtàṅ, adv. exeedingly, extremely; §

nta̤̯m, adv. emph. just now; ntsě ntà̯m ndiò just up to now

nta̤mnì, n. (a-ma) textiles, wickerwork; § ta̤m
yo tsǒ̤’tu bo̤ ntamni ma this cap is my wickerwork ;
but: yo bo̤ mba’n; ma this basket is my weaving.

ntamt̯̀m, adj. also: nta̤mta̤3m naked, bare

ntà̯mta̯m, adv. together

ntâmta̯m, adj. twisted, braided, plaited

nta’, n. (a-ma) bifurcation of branches or boughs, forked br .;
ndz’ ni ndam ni nsan ntà’ mi ni ndza̤n tam bi ndzamy
the pumpkin winds and forks its branches and produces
a lot of fruit; § mfa’, ta’ti

nta’màndzi, n. crossway; § mbùmmaǎndzi

nta’nì, n. quarrel, wrangle, dispute, jealousy; nta fa̤ df̤d mà mb̌ṅ bo̤;
à boṅ bàm yab bo̤ ńin, bo ndz_ yǎb yum bo̤ ńin jealousy
between brothers is not good; but it is good that they
have one bag and one meal.

nta’ntà’, adj. forked, split, cleft

nt̯d, n. king’s palace, chief’s place or court; § ntsinta̤d

- 2 -
ntan, n. the earth-mound in which the colocasia grows;
u ntsǐ fǐ k’, ni ndeti, ni ṅka̤d ni ntà̯n màù ndzṳ’ e? are
you the rainwater which is caught up by the colocasia
leaf and poured on to another person =s you care for

others and neglect your own people.

nted, n. louse, lice

ntèlika̯d, adj. smooth, clean, even, plain, polished; mbùm (ńo bo
ntèlika̯d the body of a snake is smooth; § eg, tali

nti, n. spittle, saliva; § eu ṅwid, tsad, tam, mi nti
ntintid, n. a kind of carrot
ntò, n. meat, relish, additives, vegetables;
fa ntò mo miyà, n’dzǐ’ti give me some vegetables to

taste; § bitsarṅ, inkùkòb

nto, n. first shoot, bud, germ, sprout, offspring; nto (ṡko̍ndàòṅ
young banana shoot; nto raffia sprout; § ṙ’go̤d

nto, n. (a-ma) intestines, bowels; ntońà’mm bowels of an animal;
yoò màùn bo̤ ntò ma this man is my inside, I begot him.

ntobnsi-ṅgòṅ, n. native town, native country, place of birth; §
ntokàd, n. small lancet-formed knife, used to pierce abscesses,
sores, etc., to separate hair when plaiting pigtails and
also used as an ornament on the women’s headdress.
ntòku’, n. a bright-coloured, poisonous snake, about ̤̌o cm long
ntokù’, n. young colocasia leaf shoots , used as a vegetable
ntokù’ tsù’, n. shoots of a kind of colocasia leaf, used as a vegetable

if not cooked well, they cause a convulsive feeling in
the mouth.

ntokù̯jnà’, n. young, undeveloped shoot of the wild date-palm; § ko̤̍nà’
ntom, n. soupport, pillar

ntòǎ mfa, n. string of pearls or beads

ntǎmtâm, n. a (small poisonous) caterpillar sp., if touched
causes blisters on the skin

ntòn, n. maizepulp fluid of Indian corn;

= 2S;6: -

bo bo̤ mvi moâ̍mbod, bo ntob ntòn, ni mfa mboò n le, i
vi mon a; bo ni nno ntòn bo̤ ni fṳ̯kob vwhen a baby is
born, they stir a maizepulp and give it to the mother who
has given birth to the baby,; it is ’drunk’’ with a spoon.

n. § montǎndzi

ntònka̤d, adj. hot, vehement, violent, fierce; kǎdzyṳ ntònka̤ d b̌ṅ mà
dzṳ̯ a bot nmaeal is nice to eat; ntòn ntònka̤ d bǎṅ mà no
a hot maizepulp is nice to drink; mo’ accident bo̤ nù ntòn -

ka̯d amnaaccident is a violent matter; § tòǎn

n. an early shoot of the raffia vinifera, used for bagweaving;
§ ṡka

ntò̌ǒṅkùndòṅ, n. young shoot of banana leaf , undeveloped, used
for bags §

ntɑ̌ǒńàm, n. nealt diet, additive

ntoto , adj. arrived; mo n toto, bùn ntoto newcomer, stranger;
§ to, wa̤n

ntòtàòṅ, n. good, tasty meat;
fa ntòtòṅ, n’to’ ntsù a mu give me some good meat
to stimulate my appetite; § con

ntoto̤n, n. undeveloped sprout of the oilpalm leaf

ntòwa’, n. vegetable, prepared from the leaves of a small kind of
bean; § wa’

ntoloṅ, n. (a-ma) flower, blossom; ntolovṅ ṅkùn a bean blossom;
ntoloaṅ dzu baṅ a potato blossom; § ntov̇, ntsalaṅ

ntòṅ, n. (à --ma) also: tov̇ navel, navelstring, umbilical cord;
ntoòdṅ à bo ma Tarso my navelstring is at Tarso -= I
was born at T., where they have buried my navelstring.

ntoṅ, n. blossom; § ntolovṅ, ntsalaṅ

ntò̌§ṅbo, n. pl. ntǒ̤ṅ̇mbo (a-ma) elbow

nťṅkù, n. pl. ntǒ̤̇ṅkù (a-ma) heel

ntoṅntòṅ, adj. high, elevated; nda ntǎṅntòṅ tower, steeple, spire;
g toṅni, ton’

 

= 2; -:

nto’ntsù, n. hole in the lip for a plug; § to’, ntsù
ntò’ti ṅgùm, n. crossed roofstrut; § wa’ti ṅgùm; tò’ti
nto̤m, n. also: to̤6 vistness, spy

nto̤ṅkà’, n. storm, tempest, hurricane, the one that bends the plants;
à ni mbo ni ṅkwembṳṅ, f̤f̤d nda, ni nto̤ ṅgo

ma sṅkà’, ni mba nti ṅko̤̍ndòṅ, ni mma’ masi when the
rainy season re turns, a tempest passes, breaking and
throwing bananastems about;

ṅgùlum nda, ni ntso’ vin ni tu ndab; à t̤n, ntsǎ f̤f̤d
tǒ̤ṅkà’; à mà dìi̤’li tg. when a hurricane passes, it
tears grass out from the roof; also it can uproot trees.

nto̤ṅnika̤d, adj. oblique, wry, askew, crooked, bent, inclined;
§ nto’nto’, nto̤̍ṅto̤ṅ

nto̤ṅto̤ṅ, adj. wry, inclined, unstable, fickle ;
nto̤ṅto̤ṅ bùn fickle people, wavering person;
ndab le ntoṅto̤ṅ the house bends from the vertical;;
à born ù bi ntoṅto̤ṅ you had better plant it in a sloping
position; § torn̯, nto̤ṅnika̤d, nto̤’nto̤’

nto̤’ntǒ̤̤̤ , adj. wry, askew, oblique; § nctoṅikad

nt̀ṅgòṅ, n. quarter of a village, town or country;
nt ṅgòṅ tsi ńo’mṳ̍ńo’muṳ’̯ the town quarters are near;

n

nto̤’ ù your quarter; nto̤’ bào̍m stranger’s quarter.
ntsa, n. shad fish

ntsa, n. (a-ma) top, point, head (of an army), vanguard, suburb;
§ ntsambad, ntsâlṳ̯m, ntsânsibo, ntsíâyum

ntsǎmbṳṳṳ̀ṅ , n. return of rain season (February - March)
ntsàbnì, n. slander, insult, invective; § tsàbti, Esǎb
ntsalaṅ, n. flower; § ntoloṅ, ntoṅ, mbàṅ mbuṳ

ntsâlu̯m, n. tip of the tongue; § lm

ntsàm. n. scrotum; § mbǎṅntsàm

ntsâmbad ,, n. peak, top of a mountain; § sńdmbad , ntsa

ntsâmbo, n. wretch, villain, fornicator, strumpet, prostitute;
ù ntsíâmbo you are a illain.

326 =

n. tough tree sp. (flexible, which cannot be
uprooted by elephants); § ku̯̍ba̤nnswen

ntsǎmndzi, n. old, torn garment, piece of cloth; § ndzi
Ntsàmvi, n. the highest God, the almighty; Tità
ntsànika̤̯d, adj. difficult, hard; § tsaàni

ntsânsibo, n. pl. ntsânsimbo (a-ma) tip of finger, end of finger;
§ ntsa

ntsanù, n. affliction, distress; § tsa, nù
ntsàṅ, n. a (sour) plant sp., used as a relish with (other) food

ntsaṅ, prenas. form of v. aux. to express possibility;
à 1ǎ’ ntsaṅ mbǎṅ, mbo̤̍ à to Sama ks ṅkuṅ, Sama
had better come first.

ntsàṅka̤d, adj. spoiled (food, etc.)

ntsǎṅtsàṅ, adj. confused, not clear, indistinct;
mù ni ṅkiti lṳ̌’ bo̤ ntsàṅtsàṅ I see but not distinctly ;
§ kiti

ntsàsṳ , n. pl. bàtsàsṳ manager, presiding people; § ṡko̤sṳ

ntsayum, n. precursor, harbinger, one who announces the arrival
of; § ntsa, ntsà’ni

n. secrecy, secret plan, myster;y;
ni; ntsa̤m secretly; boà bo tsi’ ntsà̤m together they plot
mà sam ntsà̯m bo ṅgâ, m̌’ mùn tǎ’ mà to ma l’ bo kà
ts’ nts̤̯̀m a, mbi to, ntsà̤̯nm le bo̤ lǎ le bo iṅgâ, i
sam to miss a secret plan means, that when a person
plans to reach the secret place agreed upon, on arrival he
realizes that he has missed the plan, namely the plan has
already been settled ;
bà In mà tsi’ ntsà̤m ṅgâ, à bǒ̌ṅ mà to ṅgǒ̤ vṳm ma ṅg wan
we may agree secretly that it is good to hunt in the bush;
mà tsi’ nts̤̀m = mà tsu mǒ’ nù ṅgâ, bimo’ bùn ma
nù le bo̤ asgreeing on s.th. secretly means to talk about
s.th., other people should not know; §

ntsa̯m, n. grass sp., used for twisting ropes; it has very strong
fibres and grows in the forest; § ke

ntsà’, n. (strong) tree sp. found in the steppe with very hard

 

ntsa’, nu.

ntsa’, n.

= 261 =

wood on which the silkworm (ocaterpillar) feeds; when its
juice is boiled it is used to harden pottery; § ndoṅ ntsà’

one hundred thousand

earth, ground, soil; ntsa’ kǒ̤m wu’ the soil slipped there.
bo dzo’ màùn ni ntsa’ they cover a person in mire;

bo kà tso̤b ntsa’ yàb their land was safeguarded with

a charm.

ntsa’ bàṅ, n. red soil, often used for building houses;

ntsà’nì, n.

ntsǎ’ntsxǎ’ ,

ntsa’bàṅ mà ṅkǎm ma ndzu’ mǎ’ mùn bo̤ one day
everyone has to bury a member of his family;

ṅgoòṅ bùn me’ tuṅ mo̤̍ ku bùn ma yǎb ndzù’ all people
bury their dead in their compound. In all the compounds
red soil is everywhere = in each compound there is a
burial ground. so that everyone can bury his dead (family)
in his own compound; § ntsa’si

omen, foreshadow, harbinger; a womani’s first monthly

period ; i yo my ntsà’ni she has seen the harbinger
of her maturity, she has had her first period;

y ntsà’ni ntuṅ ṅgwà̤n that’s the first monthly period;
Saturday bo̤̍ ntsà’ni Sondi Saturday is the forerunner

of Sunday; § ntsayum

n. rattle; § mbàctsà’,

ntsa’ṅkù, n. pl. of tsa’kù the part of the foot between the toes

ntsa’si, n.

and ankle

black soil, black ground; § ntsa’bàṅ, nsi

nts̯̀(d, n. pl. bàntsà̯d feool, silly person; § ts

ntsen, n.
ntse’ṳ, n.
ntsi, n.

urine, stale; also: disease of the urinary bladder;
family, race, blood:; y yǎ ntsen that is my family;

ù kà bo̤ yo̤ ntsen mo̤ṅgwi tàd koǎ ntsùndab e’ (Pr.)

have you ever seen a woman’s urine jump as high as
the threshold ? = that’s a man’s job and not a woman’s
one; § csenti

tree sp. whose wood is good for carving

(-ma) liquid of any kind, water, river, steam, brook, rivulet;
tears: ntsi Iǎ’ i the water took him; he was drowned;

mà dž’ ntsi scoop water;

mà dzàti ntsi sprinkle water on the floor to drive

off jiggers; nesi dzim the water evaporated;

=s 262 -

nesi; b̤̍ti the water is boiling or waving;

ntsi bo̤ ku̯̍ swiǐswǐ bo̤, ni ṅko’ṅko’ e? the water no longer
flows downwards , but upwards? = everything has turned
the wrong way round; le bo (ig, m̌’ ṅgàṅ ṅkab lon yum
mbò ṅgàṅ-fom; ṅgàṅ-fom le yâ, ntsi bo̤ k̤̍ bo, tǐ
ṅko’ko’ e? cooes the river not flow downwards now, but
only upwards?; similar: ù jon ńùṅ mb ńo e ?’ do you
beg hair from a snake?

ntsi ṅgṳ ni ṅgu’ bo ni bi ṅko̤’ṅko̤’ (Pr) the great stream
only broadens because of the brooks and rivulets;

ntsin, à ni ṅko a flowing water, river, stream; § ṡ̍an

ntsi, n. (a-ma) song, tune, air, hymn; ntctsiba̤d warsong;
ntsi ṅgu’ a song to heroify a person

ntsi, n. also: tsi the man’s father-in-law, son-in-law;
brother-in-law; nesi bà-Fotsu’ a man who married a
Bafotsu woman; mo orphan, not one’s own child.

ntsì bànta’ confluence of two rivers; § ntsi nta’ iba

ntsibàṅ, n. (a-ma) blood, race, family ;

ntsibàṅ yò màùn bùmti bo i nsun i the blood of this
man suits his friend’s blood, they are on very good terms;

ntsibàṅ mùṅgwi ò le bùmti bos mu̯mbǎṅ ò this woman’s
blood corresponds with this man’s blood, she loves
this man.

ntsibàṅ ńìàm, n. animal’s blood

ntsǐbṳn nmàmntsì , n. cow’s milk

ntšjbà, n. the sea, ocean; § lib

ntsì mfo̤ka̤d cold water

ntsǐmi’, n. (ma) tears

ntsinì, n. (ma) circumstances, external condition, material welfare;
ntsini ma bo̤ m’ mbom, yi, a mà ṅkù’ni mb mù bo a
my material wealth is of a kind which is not sufficient
enough for myself.

ntsinikad, adj. even, plain, level; correct, just; § esini

ntsi nta’ iba, n. confluence of two rivers; § nesi bànta’

ntsint̀d, n. pl. tsǐntà̯d king’s servant; § nt̤d, tsi

 

- 263 -

ntsǐ ntò. n. gravy; ntǎ ò bo̤ wàli wali this gravy is watery.

ntsìintsǐ ,, adj. watery, liquid

ntsǐntsì, n. badly cooked food which is watery.

ntsì n. deep water, pool

ntsì ṅkudkud , n. ice, frozen water, snow

ntsì ṅwà’nì, n. ink

ntsì tsitsi, n. still waters, pool;
ntsi tsitsi mà ni ndo̤’ni mà lǎ’ mùn bo̤ it seems that
the water is still, but it is moving slowly;
m̌’’ mùn tsi bi ko̤̯̍ ntsu bo̤, la mbo̤ mù ntso̤’ka̯d some-
body sitting without talking, is a fierce man; he seems
to be a calm person, but in fact he is a fierce one;
-§ esitsid mùn

nts n. proper name of a river in Ndop near Balikumbad

ntsǐ vàvà , n. waterfall, whirlpool, vortex

ntsokad, adj. deep, profound; § tso

ntsòn, n. stalk, stem, haft, also: neck of a species of pumpkin;
ntsòn lo̤’ the neck of this pumpkin is used as a syringe;
also used as a funnel; § o’

ntsonù, n. destiny, fate, lot; à ya ntfsonù it’s my fate; § tso, nù

ntsoṅu, n. time when the moon goes down; § nEsońùm

ntsońùm, n. sunset, west; § tso, ńùm, ntsoṅ̍u

ntsòtso , n. newcomers, naturalized people, proselytes

ntsòb, n. unit (used with numerals from one to ten);
a ndab wom ndà’ndà’, ntsòb i ti bo are only ten
houses; bùn ntsoòb iba twelve people, (wom ten’ is

not mentioned, it goes without saying)

ntsob, n. kind of charm, consisting of snake heads and poisonous
plants

ntsob ntònton kind of charm, the materials of which have been
burnt, and who’s ashes are kept in an antelope’s horn;
§ ton

- 261 -
ntso’, adj. bent, bowed, inflected

ntso’bàṅ, n. weaver bird

ntso’lo’, n. witness for the prosecution; ntso lo’ yà e?’ where
is the witness to prosecute this af fair?

ntsò’ndzàm, n. small axe

ntsò’nì, n. the circular tuft of hair at the back of the head, the
rest is shaved off: ṅ’kà kom tù a, ntsi’ tso̤̍ṅni;
mà tsi’ ntsod’ni bo̤ ṅgâ, bo bǒ̤ nm màùn le ma I ’ bd,
bo tsò̀d tù i, nšm ni ntsò’ni le; màùn bǒ̤ ndzo̤í tu Ie, i
ṅgâ, a tu mug̯mbàṅ; ntsò’ni le ti mà mbo, bo Inn ṅgâ,
a tu mòṅg wi I have shaved my head and left a tuft
at the back: to leave a tuft at the back has a special
significance: when a man is shot on the battlefield, his
head is cut off and carried by holding onto the tuft;
when s.o. sees the head, he knows it is the head of a
man; but when no tuft exists, he knows that it is the
head of a woman.

ntsò’nì ṅgob, n. cock’s comb; § jsigob

ntsub, n. charm of any kind; § tso̤̍b, wòn

ntsu̍b ṅkudkud, n. charm which is put in a small hut

ntsu̍b ntsi’tsi’, n. charm which is placed on a stick, etc.; § esi’

ntso̤b, n. (a-ma) flower bud ;
ntso̤b bini mà tu’ the buds begin to unfold.

ntsobnsi, n. dysentery ; § dǎdyṅa

ntso̤̍btso̤b, adj. carved, sculptured; § eso̤b

ntsǒmṅgò̤, n. young, fresh grass ; § ntso̤ṅgo̤

ntso̤ṅ, n. pl. bàntso̤ṅ niser, niggard, avaricious person

ntso̤ṅ, n. mucous or viscous liquid of any kind, soft like rubber;
also: by which a glass bottle is named after; §

ntso̤ṅ ṅka, n. coarse sediment of palmwine; tough resin on the
trunk of the raffia vinifera.

ntsǒ̤̇, n. (a-ma) tassel, tuft, knot, fringe;
ntsǒ̤̇ mfa stringed glass beads ornamenting garments,

 

ntsg̤ṅgṳ̀, n.

ntsoti, v.
ntsò’, n.
ntso̤’, n.

==B 26; =

clothes, bottles, etc.;
ntsǒ̤̇ ndzi ffinges on clothes; ntsǒ̤̇ koòb tassel on a
belt; ṅgwàn tassel on a whip.

§ ntsǒ̤mṅgo̤
measure of liquids; § tsoti

swamp, spongy ground, flooded ground in the rainy
season; § bitàmntsi

(a-ma) edge, sharpness; power;

ntso̤’ mu̯ni edge of a knife; ks ntso̤ mab their means
of power;

bo momti ntso̤’ muyńi, à ti mà ntso̠’ mbòṅka̤d bo̤, bo syṅ
they test the edge of the knife, if it is not sharp
enough, they sharpen it; § so’, ṅgwàd màòn,

ntso̤’ka̤d, adj. sharp, biting, angry, irritated, sour; § ts’

ntso̤’̤̯̀ ndzi,

ntsù, n.

n. a garment, torn into pieces

opening, mouth, door, access, entry, passage, beginning
bàm opening of a bag; § (y) wan;

entrance of a yard;

kě special small entrance for women who are
menstruating;

ntsɑbù’ ṅgòṅ entrance to village or town; § bo’; ntsǐo̤
a filled bowl: ta’ ńin one full up bovl;

ntsěkò’ entrance to a bridge;

ntsǐkṳ̯b opening of a vessel, mouth of cup;

beginning of the dry season;

window, opening in the wall that serves as

a window; mouth of a pot; also: edge of a pot;
ntfsɑǔdab door of the house, entrance to a house;
ntsǐndatsaṅ a prison door ;

ntsɑǔndzàm, ntsǐ-mfṳ̯n-ndzàm bole for the handle of the
axe: ntšntsi mouth of a stream, entrance to a ford;
ntsɑntsilibà strand, where access to the sea is possible;
entrance to a cavern, cave;

ntšṅgod’ proper name of a cave south of Bali;
ntsǐ̌ṅgo̤̍ the mouth of the grass = li nd (used in riddles)
ntsṅka’ entrance to a garden;

nostril; anus;

ntsi entrance to a ford;

ntsɑ̌tàṅ. small opening in the lower ceiling; § motàn;
ntsǐ̌tsen the forehead :; § nto’ntsù

ntsù ndìbndìb, adv. of time; at this time (in the future, when the

- o66 -

same season or period of time returns) ;
ntsù ndib fu’tu at the same time

ntsɑ̌ntàb, n. shed in a field for storing goods; cottage in a fie
where women live whilst working in the field, often
for weeks or even months.

n. troop, army for war

ntsùǔ̌fà’, n. vork order h service; group of workmen
ntsɑndikàṅ, n. discharge of a gun, shot

ntsuṅ, n. couch grass sp. (used to staff couches)

ntsɑ̌ṅgàm, n. flattering talk; bo ngṅ ntsɑ̌ṅgàm mb i they flatter
him; § (̇gàm

ntsuṅntsuṅ, adj. headlong, head foremost ;

bo tsam ṅgob ntsuṅtsuṅ they carry the fowl with its
head hanging down.

ntsù’, nu. ten thousand; ntsù’’ iba ni ṅkam ikwà twenty four .
thousand

ntsù’, n. person, called by a joint name;
ntfsù’ a a man or woman, named after me; § csu’

ntsu’, n. day; ntsu’mvi day; ntsu’mvi buṳ̯’ our days;
ntsu’dzi; holiday., feast-day; § dzi;
ntsu’dzṳṅgo̤̍ṅka̤̍ko’ the day of unleavened bread;
ntsu’γǒ̤ěṳ̯ndzù’ the day of returning home; § yǒ̤̌
ntsu’komtuvù’ the day of shaving the head after a death
in a family; in the case of a man after the third day,
in the case of a woman after the fourth day;
ntsu lùṅṳbùn the day of salvation; ntsu n̤btindab
the day before Sunday when they clean the church;
ntsundo̤ also: ntsu special dance for the wedding
day; the wedding day;
ntsu’ṅgo̤’ the day of misfortune; ntsuntsu’ daily;
ntsu ṅko’ntan the third day after the big market; on the
evening of this day the bride is taken to the bridegroom;
bo ni ntse ni ṅgònndam bo̤ ni ntsu’ ṅko’ntan ma ndzǔ’ ndu
ṅgoònndam, i nòṅ wu’ ntsu’mvi ikwà, bo tsè’n i ma ndà
ndu i three days after the big market day they lead
the bride to the bridegroom’s compound; she lives there
four days and is then taken to her husband’s house;
ntsu’tadvù the day on which the mourners are tended to;
in the case of a man’s death it is after the third day and

l
(

 

n

in the case of a womani’s death after the fourth day;

§ ntsu’kom-tu-vàù, vu;

ntsu’tsǒ̤dsa’ day of judgment;

ntsu’vo̤’tinùmbuṳ̯ka̯d day of recondciliation;

ntsu’vu day of death; ù kà bo yo̤ ntsu’ ko, nsu to, nti’

u ku ṅka’ e? on what day did you see a fish coming

to see you in the grassfield ?

ntsu’mvi b bo̤ ndzo̤̍ à b̌̌ṅ a, ni mbeb nctsù’ i, jp, a
to tso’, vǐ̌ a aur days are like the days of the withering
leaf which awaits the day, when it will fall.

ntsù’ṅgòṅ, n. pl. bàntsù’ṅgòṅ deliverer, redeemer, saviour of the
land or town; ntsà’ṅgoòṅ ndzṳ̯ bo̤ teohe saviour of the
town received no profit for his work; § tcsàù’

ntsu’titsu’ti, adj. joined together; § tsu’ci, ṅ’kumtikumti
ntsu̯ntsì, n. basin formed by the water from a waterfall; .§ Ǐ̌mntsi
ntsu̯ṅ n. jug, picher; § ntsonṅ

ntsuṳṅ, n. (a-ma) symmaetry, proportion;
màù man vwith a well proportioned body;
ntso̤̍ṅ mi wu’, lâ i bo̤ bàm ndzumuṳ̯ be is a man vith
a well proportioned body, but he has nothing else.

ntsu̯ṅnì, n. confusion, helplessness;
wè i bae loses his head, becomes confused.

ntsuṅṅù, n. full moon; bo kaà vi u ni ntsyṅṅù e? were you born
at the time of full moon (said to a ’round’ person) ?

ntswàṅ, n. distance: mntswaàṅ i its distance; nts wànn sisà far off;
ntswàṅ nda i sa’ mṳ̌ his house is far off.

nts wàṅnts wàṅ, adv. at a distance, aside;
ndab iba be bo̤ ntswàṅntswaàrṅ the two houses are a
good distance from each other.

ntswa’tswà’, adj. assorted, classified, separated
i tsi’ ndo̤ṅ ntswa’tswà ba sorts the raffia ribs according
to their qualities; § tswa’tswa’, tswa’ti

ntswenlàṅ, n. eaves; tsi’ kòùbti ma ntswenlàṅ mà leti ntsi mbo̤ṅ
put the vessel under the eaves to collect rain water.

ntswì, n. border of a door, frame;
ntsw ntsundab cdoor frame; § teswi

- 266

ntùm, n. teae large cloth of a noble man which he wears between
his legs and which is fastened with a belt; the long part
hangs down in front and in the back it hangs from the
belt like an apron;
i we’ ndzi ntùm be puts on his cloth (of nobility ).

ntum, n. message, news, messenger; tidings;
ù fni ntum you are like a messenger, sent off to
stop dancing; but when he reached there, he began
to dance himself; § bad, tum

Ntumbàòṅ, n. good news, the Gospel

ntumndàb, n. (ma) origin; reason of leaving work, the house, the
land; nfummndà ma the reason for my departure

N n. second day before the great market at Bali

ntumṅgwan , n. people from the fields, not of Bali origin; Bà ni
ntumṅgwà̤n people belonging to Bali; § ntoto, mvivi

ntumńàùm, n. east; sunrise

ntumtàṅ, n. protruding section on the upper ceiling, only seen on
the outside wall of a house; §

ntùntù’, n. also: ntu’ntù ’ enormous number, too much, glutton;
ù ti’ ntu’ntù’ e?’ have you become a glutton? (said to
a person who helps himself too much) ;
dzṳ̯ ntu’ntù’ ńǎ’ nswen = ntu’tù’ kà ńǐ̌’ nswen gluttony
killed the elephant ,;
kǎě ntùntù’ mà mbǒṅ bo̤, ù ti mà ndzi’ti bo̤, a fa vu
mb ù too many things are not good , if you are
not careful, they may kill you.

ntuṅ, n. pl. of turṅ (ta-ma) ears

ntuṅndzi, n. lapel on a cloth; used fig.;
mf;(d i, ni nsob mi’ mi ni yò nù le bo̤ (co one is to
defraud or overreach his brother in this matter, no
one is to trample on the lapel of his brother’s cloth
and to hurt his eyes in this matter.

ntûṅtuṅ, adj. dug; § mandzi ntoṅtuṅ, tuṅ

ntuṅtùṅ, n. shrub sp. with hollow stem

N

ntù’, n. mark, target; maà ta ntù’ = mà ntù’’ also: mà ma’ ntàù’
shoot at a target with a bolt or an arrow or a spear

 

= 26;

ntù’, nu. six (when preceding the noun); § intu’

ntu’, n. cup, goblet;
ntu’ntsi a cup of water; ntu’ ndù’ a cup of vine;
bo ti’ ntu’ ńin, ni nno, ni ṙko̤ni they received one cup
and are drinking together, they are reconciled; § tu’

ntu’ṅgàm, nu. sixty
ntu’titṳ, n. shoot of a tree

ntṳ̯m, n. (a-ma) heart, breast, soul; a nu heart;
ntà̤̀ a li I was thoughtless; à tfso̤ěûd ntṳ̤̤ a it hurts
me; ntg̤̍ a san my(̤̍ also: là̤̯m a san m(̤̍ am ffrightened,
terrified; by̤d ntgṳ̤̀ u change your mind,;
nt’ṳ̯ dzama Bùn the heart of most people;
Farao kà tsi’ ni nù mbyṳkad Farao’s heart hardened
because of his wickedness; § mba(ṅntṳ̯m, b̌ṅntuṳm,
l̤̍mug, lam

ntùn, adj. living, costly, safe and sound, unhurt ; § yum
bùn

nt̀nka̯d, adj. strong, heavy, important; § ť̤n, yum t̤nka̤d
ntùn mon, n. a child, highly valued by its father
ntṳ̌nntù̯n, adj. sound, living, unhurt

ntṳ̯ntò, n. wooden spoon to stir food

SIN

ntṳ̯ vùù̯vùěaṳ, n. lungs; § mbi mbodka̤d

ntuṳ̯’, n. commansd, order, testament, last will, legacy;
a father’s curse at the time of death; nt’ wom
the ten commandments ; § nav̇ ntuṳ̯ , bubti ntuṳ’, ť̤’

nt̯’ndza̯l̀m, n. pl. bàtuṳ̯ndzà̤ěm follower, successor

ntu̯’ndza̤m, n. pl. tu̯’ndzà̤m, also: bàtuṳ’ndzà̤ěm younger brother
or sister; § ndz̤m

nù, n. thing, matter, concern, business, reason, interest,
manners; existence, nature, substance; affair, story;

à ti bo̤ nù e? is it not a good thing ?’

nù bo everything is God;

nù mboò ((ikòb everything comes from Good, or is in

the hands of God;

nù tsâ ntsù a cannot speak about it;

nɑ̌ kòṅnì

o :

i to’ti mbò bo nazo̤̍ nù le kà a hae explained to
them, how things had happened; a no ko̤ e’? what is it?
i kà γǒ̤ wu’, mbi’ nɑ̌ mfa̤d i he went there for his
brother’s sake;

nɑ̌ also: nù màyγàb immoralicty ;

n bàńikòb mommom idolatry; § ńikoòb, mommom;

nď̌ bùli ṅgoòṅ turmoil, revolt, riot, row, uproar, bustle;
nɑ̌ dzi sign, token; witchcraft;

ň fa’ni matter of dispute, controversy, dissension;
ndɑ̌fòn, pl. of nɑ̌mfòn kingdom;

nɑ̌̌ fù mbuṳ̯ka̯d poisoning, magic spell, sorcery;

nď̌ f̤̍ti ntan ttrick in trading, cheating;

nɑ̌ (olly, foolishness;

nɑ̌̌kâṅnsà’ suddeness; misfortune, mischief;

ma ni mbim bo̤ do not trust without testing;
nɑ̌ěâṅnsà’ la’ yè u a sudden misfortune will befall you;
nu ko what, why; a n ko wnhat’s the matter;

bi fuṅ a bo̤ n; ko̤ e? for what reason did you call me?
n injustice, unfairness; iniquity;

nɑ̌ mà-dzyṳ-ṅgòṅ sensuality, lasciviousness;

nɑěmàyγàb immonrality, illicit intercourse, prostitution:

§ mǎyàb; ňmà̯m impurity;

nɑ̌ mbùdbud first thing; § mbùdbud

nɑě̌mbɑ̌mbù nonsense, folly, unlawfullness; vanity ;

n mfò, pl. nɑfòn kingdom, royalty, royal power;

i kà dzṳ mfòn be became king;

nindo̤ṅ the kingdom of eaven;

nuɑ̌mfòn the kingdom of God,;,

nɑ̌mmùn substance, manner of man, nature; ňmàùn ni;
ntgṳ̯m the nature of a man is in his heart, it is hidden;
nɑ̌ mɑǐ̌-oma koman citizenship;

o
e;

mvuka̯d shameless business;
ntsà̯m secrecy, hidden things;
ns’ṳ̯n shame, disgrace;

a
(;

?

d
o

1

oc;

ň ṅg wen sexaual vice, fornification;

nɑ̌̌ ṅgyedyed nmiracle, wonderful things, prodigy ;

nd ṅkoò̤̤̍kò’ṳ̯ revenge, vengeance, retribution;

nd ṅkà dzaṅni ntsǎǐ i revenge is worse
than the initial insult ;

nd ceception, fraud, cheating; moùn b’̤ ṅko̤ yum,
k̤̀ fa ṅkab bo, ṅgàṅ-yum bi bati i ṅgâ, i fa ṅkab yum
le, i kà ko a, i bini mà bd, ni nsuṅ ṅgâ, ṅkab mà mb,,
le bo̤ nɑ̌ ṅkùb if someone gets s.th. without paying for
it and when the owner asks him to pay, refuses, saying
that he has no money, he however is what one calls
’fraud’; § ntsanù, ntsonù

love, kindness, affection;
noɑ̌k̍bi deceit, untrue story, mendacious matter;

 

2:

’nɑka̤̍ku’ incorrectness, impropriety, unfairness ;

num, v.

num mfi.

numni, v.

numti., v.

nɑ̌k̤̍t̤d boasting, vanity, pride, haughtiness;
ňlùṅ concern of life, matter of saving life;
d mà dzim ni vu cesurrection;

;

d mà santiy̤̍ things that make one merry, funny

j

mà yèmtibùn charity, charity work;

a a
eae;

mbommbom variety of things ;
good thing, matter;
n mbyṳka̯d bad story, sin, malice, wickedness, evil;

g
e;

nmi’ partiality;

n mvàglivagli unsuitable story, unfit things, improper
business;

n mfo̤kaàd shameless business, ... thing; bo kà wěǎ m̌
m̀ṅgwi boà muṳ̯mbàṅ, nto, mfa mbò esu rṅ’gâ, i nyṅ sa’
nd i, m̀ṅgwi le kà y nɑ̌ mfo̤ka̯d a certain adulterous
woman was caught and taken to jesus to be condemned;
she had committed a shameless thing;

nɑ̌ndzà̤mndzà̤m secret plot, contrivance; bo taṅ n-
ndz̤̀mndzà̤ěm they plan a secret plot;

thing intended, done on purpose;

n ndzo̤’ a different matter; evil report, slander;

n ndzṳ̤̌ndzṳ̌’ different things. manifold matters;

nd nnâna symbol., parable. hint. indication;

ň nsàdka̯d ffriendliness, decency;

nɑ̌nsṳ̯m shame, disgrace, scandel, infamy, villainy;

nù ntg̤̍n a sound matter,-way,-teaching. etc.

n ṅguka̯d birthright of the first-born;

n ṅgṳṅgṳ̯ mbommbom variety of miraculous powers;
nǒṅkù’mṳ̍ bùn-kristo history of church;

nɑ̌ sà sorcery, magic of the worst kind; Fomugko’ kà
b̤d, nti’ ṅg̤ńàm, ṅgǒ̤ mà wě mbi mǎ’ mùn, mùn le tam
i ndikàṅ, ṅgṳ̍ le ku; Fomuṳko’ ku ma ndab F. changed
into a leopard and went and caught someone’s goat;

the owner shot the leopard, it died; F. died in his house
(as a consequence)

ndtaṅ arithmetic. science of numbers:

nǒtasṳ̍’ child’s play, trifle; u mà ndìn mà kiti yò nù le
ndzo̤̍ nɑtasṳ’ bo̤ do not take this as a mere trifle;
ňtsaṅ reason for imprisonment.

bite, sting; ache: to a ni nnum a num my head is aching;
bo num l̯̀m tao they bite their tongues (in anguisb) ;

§ num mfgo’ti

n. (Pr.) one who bites and afterwards blows to
cool the pain = a hypocritical friend: § fo’ fo’ti

recipr. bite one another; quarrel

bite often; being in labour; numci vi suffer pangs of
travail; § vi

s 2 2=-

nɑ̌ni, v. take (a way, a path, a course)

nṳ̌d, v. drive on, impel, push, shove ;
i ň̤d motòr yab (̇gâ, a hae pushed their car so that
it would start; Gregory ni nň̤d motòr Gr. is driving.

nù§li, v. drive on

ǹòni, v. being jealous, being envious; rival with, vie with;
i n̤̍mi wu’ he struggles for greatness.

n̯nnu̯n, adj. true, real, actual; (emph.: kwaà’ ngnnyn)

nuṅ, v. put into, prepare, freshen up, trust in;
i ngṅ mbiyàṅ boo̤ wo̤̤wo̤ṳ̯ he fills the basket only
partly with groundnuts ;
bo nuyṅ ntfsu mùn they bribed the man; bo nyuyvṅ ntsu
ṅgàṅ-sa’sa’ ṅgâ, i to nsa’ yuṳ̯’ sa’ mbòṅka̤d, le bo; ṅgââ, bo
fa moǎ̌’’ yum mb i they persuaded the judge to consider
our case with favour; which means they have bribed him;
i nyṅ mu’ n; sa’ le he heated up the dispute ;
bo nyṅ bug ma boòm yab they put a grudge into their
belly = they made them sutffer will) ;
i nyṅ bò i ni n ndza̤m hae lent his hand to the bad plot;
i nyṅ nsàòṅ ni; ntšṅgob (Pr.) he put teeth in the fowfls
mouth = he strengthens the weak for resistance ;
Nadṅga kà mili Sama mà dž̤ Gan, le bo̤ ṅgâ, Nd. kà nuynṅ
nsòṅ S., le bo̤ ṅgâ, i kà na’ti nù mbṳkad mbàò i
Nd. taught S. how to steal = he put teeth into the mouth
of S., he encouraged him to co evil;
bo nuyṅ t̤̍n ndǐ̌ mùn they gave the man strenght;
§ nogyṅti, ṅgàṅnuyṅtindù’

nuṅti, v. put into, pour into often; bo npyṅti suṅ nn ntsù yab
they instigated them to slander; § suavi

nɑ̌sun, n. friendship
nti, v. drive on, impel, instigate

nɑ̌ tso’ kàn faithlessness against an ally

 

ṅ- pre

ṅ , interj.

ṅad, n.

ṅad, v.

g;

=: 23 =

1) prenas. variant (before velar consonants) of class
prefixes, derivated (deverbal) nouns and adjectives as
well as of verb stems: v̇gwi wife; v(ṅgoṅ country;
ndz̤̀d ni ṅṅam ńùmlob the ant disturbs the worm;
§ ṅǎm

2) prenas. variant of mu; ṅ’ ṅwà’ni I write;

ṅ’ kon 1 love; go’ ntsi I swim;

yes; good, very good;
yò ṅgàṅ-ṅwà’ni bo̤ ṅ this pupil is an excellent scholar.

roll (of any material); ̇ad ṅwà’ni, n. scroll;
ṅad-ṅwà’ni-ṅgùb parchment scroll

wrap up, roll up

ṅadṅad, adj. careless, hasty

ṅàlǎ’ṅkwin, n. brushwood, stick s

ṅâxm, v.

ṅâan, n.

ṅàni, v.

ṅanti,

ṅaṅni,

ṅaṅni,

ṅaṅsi,

force one’s way into, penetrate, rush in; press in, afflict;
ndz̤̀d ni ṅṅam ńùmlob the migratory ant disturbs the
earthworm;

bo ni ṅṅam mùn le they exert pressure on the man (in
their dispute) = bo ni mfed i ni tun they force him with
power.

juice, sap (of trees, etc.); § nesi, ṅanti

move, loose (person’s tongue) ;

l̤̀m ti kù’ ṅṅùni his tongue was loosened again;
mon pṅàni ma bǎ̌n nǎ i teoae child is moving in its
mother’s womb.

sweat, exude (sap, sweat) ;

ndzy’niì ṅanti ndǐ̌ ù sweat exudes from your skin; § ̇an
Ì̤’ tòǎn titi, ndzṳ̯’ni ṅanti ndǐ mṳ̌ I am sweating a little;
l̤’ tǎn titi, ndzṳ̯’ni fi a I am sweating a lot.

height

be high, steep, big

be churlish, rude, impudent, insolent, arrogant,;
§ ṅa’mu, ṅu’si mbùm

ṅati, v.

ṅati fà’, v.

ṅa’, v.

ṅa’, n.

ṅa’a, v.

ṅa’mù̯, v.

ṅa’ṅa’, adj.

ṅa’ti, v.

ṅa’ù̯, v.

- -

fold up, roll up, clench (the fingers, the thumb enclosed) ;
i ṅati bo i be clenches his fist; § kamti;

ṅati kè le, mbi’ à mà̯n coll up a mat, because it could
be dirty.

prepare a field for planting by putting dry grass into

the furrows and covering them slightly with soil; this
is done in order to burn the grass and manure the soil
at the same time; § kaci fà’

open

corner, edge, point; also: spine,
backbone; § (̇gaàṅ-ṅa’, ṅa’ṅa’

rise, open; § na’

puff up, be puffed up, be impudent; § s mbùm,
ṅ”u’si mbùm, ṅaṅsi

recover (from sickness)
angular, edged, cornered s

also: v̇ga’ti open, rise;
boòm a ni i̇ṅa’ti ṅa’ti my womb is rising, esp. of
pregnancy.

rise, open, take off, pick up, support;

i ṅa’̤ yn he rcises, gets up; fd ba k’ ṅṅa’̤̌ bò a my
brothers lifted my hand, they supported me again;

bo ṅa̤ kɑǔm ndab they erected the house by putting
up the wallframes;

i ṅa̤ ni mbùm i it opened of its own accord;

ṅa̤ ntsu ntṳ̀ u ṅga, nɑ̌ mbyṳka̯d mà ntso ma u bo̤
open your heart = open a garment which is covering
your bosom, in order to paint the bottom of your heart
with white soil, so that evil cannot enter your heart;
ṅa’ṳ̍ u nɑ̌ yan (co not steal again.

ṅa’ṳ̯ka̯d, adj. open, taken off, erected

a

ṅgâ, cj.

ṅgàb, n.

ṅgab, n.

introducing quotation, an intention or indirect speech;
that, as follows; § yâ

week; rigàb Sunday kwàtad seven weeks

antilope sp.

 

=

ṅgàbṅgàb, adj. weekly; v̇gàb ni ṅgàb every week

ṅgagka̤d, adj.’v. stubborn, refractory, obstinate ;
mù ni ntsu nù, bo ti yu’ bo̤, bo ni ṅgagkaàd mb
I am talking about s.th., but they are not listening, they
are stubborn; a mon it is a stubborn child.

ṅgau̯, n. big bottle, big calabash

ṅgakè, interj. introducing a sentence of rebuke or astonishment ;
ṅgakè, ù Iǎ’ mbǒ̤̍ ko my what, you want again;
you have already received your share;
ṅgakè, ù kà y, to bo̤ ni ńùm iba however you said
we should come at two o’clock and not earlier as you
now state.

ṅgako̤, p. interr.: for what reason, for what purpose, (placed before
the final interr. e) ;
ù ni ṅkud yo (i̇ka’ le, ṅgako̤ e?’ for what reason are you
putting up this fence?

ṅ(galaṅṅkù , n. longlegged animal; Mr. Longlegs

ṅgalaṅtṳ, n. dry branches of a tree or shrub

ṅgalìn, n. dish of cassava, prepared esp. by aussa people
ṅgalìiṅgòm, n. name of a quarter in Bali-(oṅa

ṅgàm, n. speech, conversation, discourse; § mm, sǎb, m’, tan,
ntsɑ̌ṅgàm

ṅgam, n. oracle, divination, fortune-telling;
ṅgam ntsǎb a teoae oracle is telling me evil;
ṅgam se’ni se’ni the oracle does not tell me anything;
ṅgam s’ a teobe oracle is telling me fortune;
ṅgam kà tso mb nimbàṅ yàb the oracle has marked
the uncle as the malefactor;
ba ni mbed mà fu’ ṅgamm the father refuses to consult
the oracle; vṡgam-vu oracle telling the cause of death;
§ vu

ṅgam-bṳ̀ti, n. nickname for a contradictory woman; § (̇gam

ṅgamnsi, n. big spider sp. (Mygale Blondij) ;
ṅgamnsi ni ntum, ni ṅkani ku̯mvi. ni nta’ tà, ni ṅg we,
ni ṅkwa̤d the big spider comes out of its hole walks
about and looks for grasshoppers, catches them and
eats them; § csen ṅ(gammnsi

=- 26 =

ṅgàn, n. crocodile

ṅgàn, n. bunch, bottle, truss, parcel;
ṅgàn ndṅ bundle of raffia ribs; ṅgàn ṅkwin bundle of
firewood; ṅgàn vin bundle of grass for thatching a roof;
§ mben

ṅgàṅ, n. a gamse; i bi ṅgàṅ ni kě ba i he gambles with his father’s
goods

ṅgàṅ, n. pl. γǎṅ, possessor of any goods comprising of men, animals
or material; actor of any profession, good or bad; sufferer
of any kind; owner of any quality or attribute of character;
ṅgàṅ-bamtińǐṅndzo̤̍mbi sheep shearer;
ṅgàṅ-bànt’ṳ̯mm a double-minded person;
ṅgàṅ-ba’kè a mat-maker; (̇gàṅ-ba’mbùd maker of a special
kind of mat, used by women as an umbrella;
ṅgàṅ-ba’ṅgòn basket maker; (̇gàṅ-ba’ṅki’ maker of a special
kind of basket; manufacturer of men’s
umbrellas; ṅgàṅ-b̤d soldier, warrior; ṅgàṅ-bebl̤̍’ guardian;
ṅgàṅ-bebndàtsarṅ jailor, gaoler; ṅgàṅ-bebńam shepherd;
ṅgàṅ-bedbùn castrator of men; bàbed k ntsi kuṳntǎ̤d mfàòn
ṅgâ, bo ma ndzěǎ m̌̌’ nù boà wi mfoòn bo̤ the eunuchs
stayed in the chief’s palace and could not harm the chief’s
wives; bimo’ bùn kà tsàṅti ṅgâ, bo bed yab (ìgâ, bo tun ke t
bo ti’ bùn ntṳ̍nka̯d some men were happy to castrate
themselves, so as to become strong men;
ṅgàṅ-bǎdkristo unbelievers; ṅgàṅ- bǎdnù Nikoòb nomnbelievers
(in God); ṅgàṅ-be’li tsu beggar; pig-headed fellow who
never admits his wrongdoings; a leopard-man
who changes into a leopard whenever he wants;
ṅgàṅ- bimkristo a believer in Ghrist;
ṅgàṅ- bimnɑńnkòbmommoòn idolater;
ṅgàṅ-biṅni a person who avoids getting entangled in work,
dispute; ṅgaàṅ-bi̇tiṅkuṳ̯ snarer, catching birds, etc.;
ṅgàṅ-bolinù calmer, soother, comforter, consoler;
ṅgàṅ-bommbàrṅ potteress;
ṅgàṅ-bomndab founder of a house, architect, builder;
ṅgàṅ-bomtsa’ brick-maker; ṅgàṅ-boni peace-maker, man
of peace; (ṅgàṅ-bǒ̌ṅntṳ̯m good-natured person, a person
ready to serve; ṅgàṅ- bǒ̇tu a clever man, a fit person;
ṅgàṅ-bo’ timid person; person, revering God;
ṅgàṅ-b̀litubùn mautineer, instigator, agitator;
ṅgàṅ-bu’luṅ lute-player, harpist ;
builder, carpenter;
ṅgàṅ-butimvi ruler of the world or part of it;
translator of books or letters;
witness, intercessor also: mb(ṳdnù;

 

translator (of languages) ;

 

=:: 2

ṅgàṅ-bu’ntṳ̯m ill-willed person, rascal, villain, wretch;
ṅgàṅ-dǎṅl̤’ (abusive) boaster, avaricious person; § daz,
dàṅṳ̯, dàṅ; ṅgàṅ-nď̤hdzù’ neighbour;

ṅgàṅ-dzadṅgàm slanderer, calumniator;

ṅgàṅ-dzaṅ sick person, patient; nts-ṅgàṅ-dzaṅ ka’m(y

the patient cannot eat any more, no appetite;

a fever-sick person;

ṅgàṅ-dzaṅtuṅ̤ moon-struck, epileptic; leopard- man;
ṅgàṅ-dzi’ti a wise person, prophet; a singer;
ṅgàṅ-dzu’bàṅ rower, sailor; ṅgàṅ-dzṳkě haeir, partaker;
ṅgàṅ-dzṳntad(ṅgònndam gouest at a marriage banquet ;
ṅgàṅ-dzṳntùntù’ glutton, gormandizer;

ṅgàṅ-dzṳtfuγàb avaricious person, profiteer;

ṅgàṅ-fàbli swindler, impostor, boaster; §
ṅgàṅ-fǎbsuṅ liar, story-teller, deceiver;

ursurper, person who tries to overthrow the chief;
ṅgàṅ-fǎǐ ṅgòṅ servant, city official, public servant;
ṅgàṅ-fǎṅmb§̤̀ṅ, sorcerer who pretends to have the power

over lightning and rain; ni ntum fǎṅmb̤̀ṅ

ma m’ l̤’ ṅgâ, à γ̤̌ ṅka ndzò the sorcerer sends the
lightning to a certain place, it strikes and asks for the debt;
ṅgàṅ-faṅni hypocrite, pretender;

ṅgàṅ-fà’ workman, artist; ṅgàṅ-fà’mantsilibà docker, sailor,
mariner: ṙgàṅ-fà Ntumbàòṅ, preacher of the Gospel;
ṅgàṅ-finbùn slave-trader, kidnapper, traitor;

ṅgàṅ-fimmbi goat-trader; salt-trader, salt-seller;
ṅgàṅ-fom poor person, a poor fellow; physician,
magician; fìgàṅ-fùbṳ̯ bùn seducer, impostor;

ṅgàṅ-fundikàṅ trader of gun-powder;

pl. γǎṅ-fuṅwwibùn adulterer;

ṅgàṅ-fuṅṅgàm feortune-teller, diviner; ṅgàṅ-fuṅwimfòn an
adulterer, esp. keen on the chief’s wives;

ṅgàṅ-fù’ upstart, fortune’s favourite; thatcher;
ṅgàṅ-fṳ̯ni pretender, hypocrite; ṅgàṅ-f̤̀nimi’ flatterer, preten-
der; ṅgàṅ-f̤ti deceiver; ṅgàṅ-f̤̍titsuNikoòb false prophet;
ṅgàṅ-γo niṅkab person greedy for money;

ṅgàṅ-γyṳ̍mni clumsy or absent-minded person;

ṅgàṅ-ka̤̍i àwè priest of jehova; titsaṅ rescuer,
deliverer, saviour; manmnacger, administrator,
overseer; ṅgàṅ-kitiṅkabṅgoòṅ treasurer of a city, minister of
finance; pastor, bishop, etc.;

ṅgàṅ-komtg’ṳ̯ carpenter, joiner, cabinet-maker;

ṅgàṅ-kǎṅbùn philantropist; the God of Love;

ṅgàṅ-koòṅni miser, niggard; ṅgàṅ-koṅnnko̤̍mi’ flatterer,
eye-servant., time-server; rider of animal, etc. ;
ṅgàṅ-kò’mgṳ’nù lover of s.th., amateur; (̇gàṅ-ko nnaṅ sentry;
ṅgàṅ-ko̤ recipient; rnṅgàṅ-ko̤kù follower, successor;

person of name, majesty;

ṅgàṅ-ko̤ṅg wa̤ d n(kàb the Lord’s anointed, king of divine right;

=s2: -

ṅgàṅ-ko̤vi midwife; ni’ deserter, apostate;

ṅgàṅ-kùb notorious run-in-debts; ṅgàṅ-kudndab architect;
ṅgàṅ-kudndâmfòn builder of the chief’s palace;

ṅgàṅ-kudntso̤b preparer of magic medicine to protect the
house and farm; i kab (ìgo̤ ṅkud ntso̤̤b mṳ̯̌ṳ̌ nd’
ṅgob, nso̤ mandàùn ntso̤b le ṅgâ, a tun, nnǎn nù mbyṳ̯kad

the magician picks some strong grass and makes a charm,

he then gets a fowl and kills it over the charm, so that

the charm has power and wards off evil;

ṅgàṅ-kudzid travealler, wanderer; §

ṅgàṅ-kuńàm owner of pigs; (̇gaàṅ-ko̤̍bàn enemny, hater;
ṅgàṅ-ka̤̍bimnù one refusing s.th.; lame person;
ṅgàṅ-kṳ̍jǎn, bǎka̤̍làn (orig.) one who does not weep during
the mourning ceremony, but starts when the meal for the
weepers is being prepared; sponger, parasite; § an;

illiterate, unlearned person;

ṅgàṅ-kṳ̍lò̇n pagan; one of two partners
propounding riddles; boaster, proud, arrogant
person; feeble or unimportant person;
banker, money changer;

ṅgàṅ-ku̯tu thickhead, blockhead, dull fellow; stubborn person;
philosopher; ṡgàṅ-ṅkwa̤dbùn camnibal;
ṅgàṅ-kwo̤limùn tramp, vagrant, beggar (owing to laziness) ;
ṅgàṅ-kwo̤limùn seducer, betrayer, enticer;

ṅgàṅ-lad quarreller; blacksmith; ṅgàṅ-lam-nṅgṳ̀ṅ
baker; ṅgàṅ-lanmi’ person with insight, p. of wisdom and
understanding; person with good luck, morally
undefiled, sincere person; shameless swindler;
ṅgàṅ-li sleepy fellow; bed-fellow;

literate; astronomer;

ṅgàṅ-loṅ lazy fellow, sluggard, idler; ̇gàṅ-loṅni idler,
sluggard; ṅgàṅ-lo’ cripple, person with a defect or infirmity;
ṅgàṅ-lo’ ntuṅ stubborn fellow; ṅgaàṅ-ld’ti plaintiff, prosecutor;
palmwine-tapper; (̇gàṅ-lùṅṳbùn saviour, redeemer;
ṅgàṅ-lu’ni scamp, rascal; ṅgàṅ-mǎ’ ked archer, bowman; j ta;
ṅgàṅ-màǎ kwàn keeper of slaves; ṅgàṅ-mà’ mvi regent of the
world; ṅgàṅ-mǎṅg̤̍ṅ sower; ṅgàṅ-mǎ’nàm cattle rearer;
ṅgàṅ-m̤n dirty fellow, also fig .; ṅgàṅ-mbenṅka’ neighbour ;

§ mùmbenti; ṅgàṅ-mbùbti stammerer, stutterer ;
ṅgàṅ-mitikě devourer, gormandizer; ṅgàṅ-miitàn lit. person
with five eyes, one who knows everything, omniscient person;
ṅgàṅ-mɑ̌dbòm person with a swollen belly, dropsical person;
ṅgàṅ-mṳ̍mbǎṅkù flat-footed person or person with ankles
that swell easiliy; ṅgàṅ-mo̤̍nàṅ intriguer, plotter, cunning
person; person pretending to hide in water like
the evil spirit, so as to catch people and then sell them as
slaves; § ṅgàṅ-sà, - dzi, -biṅgo̤̍, ṅgàṅ-mvuṳ̤ keeper of docgs;
ṅgàṅ-muṳγbù’ builder, architect ; ṅgàṅ-naṅmbàṅ cook;

 

 

=

ṅgàṅ-naṅgo̤̍ṅ owner of arable land; ṡgàṅ-na’tinù tutor, master;
ṅgàṅ-na’tiṅwà’ni teacher; ṅgàṅ-ndab master of the house,
owner; slanderer, liar; ̇gaàṅ-ndânsi chief’s
bodyguard in times of war; ṅgàṅ-ndòm accursed person;
neighbour; ṅgàṅ-ndzi owner of garments,
clothes, trader of ...; ṅgàṅ-ndzo debtor; ṅgàṅ-ndzo̤ṅ niggard;
eye-witness; witness
bribed with wine; v̇gàṅ-ndzù’ owner of a homestead;

§ - nonondù’ drunkard, wine-bibber;

ṅgàṅ-nsṳ̯n good-natured fellow, (unable to refuse a petition) ;
ṅgàṅ-ntan trader, merchant, dealer;

ṅgàṅ-ntsàbn; scoffer, blasphemer, mocker; vein;
ṅgàṅ-ntsù prattler, tattler; ṅgàṅ-ntum messenger, ambassador ;
ṅgàṅ-ntummfoòn, pl. ṅkuntummfòm messenger of chief or king;
perfidious person; rower, sailor;
ṅgàṅ-nyṅtindù’ waiter, steward, cup-bearer; ṅgàṅ-ṅgam diviner,
fortuneteller; § ṅgàṅ-fuṅṅgam; (ṅgàṅ-ṅgo̤’ distressed, afflicted
person; ṅgàṅ-ṅgùmba judge, bailiff; neighbour;
§ ̇gaàṅ-ndundzà’; ṅgàṅ-ṅgwa̤d ai trader, producer of aoil;
adulterer, unchaste person; ṙgàṅ-ṅkab rich man;
ṅgàṅ-ṅkad traveller; § v̇gàṅ-kudzid; ṅgàṅ-ṅkoòndum enemy ;
ṅgàṅ -ṅkùòb swindler; ṅgàṅ-ṅu’sibùm boaster; § ṅgàṅ-fàbli;
ṅgàṅ-ṅwàna circumciser; ṅgàṅ-ṅwaà ni schoolboy;
ṅgàṅ-nwà’niňṅgoòṅ townclerk, secretary of state;

ṅgàṅ-ńamni also: niggard, avaricious person;

ṅgàṅ-ńal̤̍ spy, explorer; ṅgàṅ-ńa ńàùm hunter, § ṅgaàṅ-kṳ̍ńa’,
ṅgàṅ-ńa’ṅgoòṅ spy, emissary, explorer; ṅgàṅ-ńodbùnmantct-si
baptist; ṅgàṅ-ńoṅbṳ̯m suckling baby; ṅgàṅ-ńdṅṳnù pollice, spy;
ṅgàṅ-ńǎ’bùm murderer, homicide; ṅgàṅ-ńd tisṳbonmn murderer of
the first-born; treader of a wine-vat, vine-
dresser; ṡgàṅ-ńǐ ṅγùb tanner; ṅgàṅ-ń̤ṅtintṳ̯’ trespasser;
ṅgàṅ-ń̤̌ nimbùm paralytic, lame person; ṙgàṅ-pěnù inquirer;
ṅgàṅ-pètinù examiner; bad practicing medicine man;
ṅgàṅ-sǎd blusterer; magician; ṅgàṅ-sǎṅl̤̀’
person causing a discord; § (̇gàṅ-kǎmlà̤’; ṅgàṅ-saṅni friendly,
kind person; v(̇gàṅ-sà̇ Ntumboṅ preacher of the Gospel;
ṅgàṅ-sàtinù gossip, scandal monger; v̇gàṅ-sa’mvi judge of
the world; neat, clean person; ṅgàṅ-sentimi’
watchfull person; mà nt’ ṅgâ, mo yum i

vo̤ bo; i ni ṅkiti kě bi a watchful person does not want

s.th. to get lost; he guards his belongings;

ṅgàṅ-sǔ’mmfě̌̍muṳsṳ̍ṅ bearer of a red feather, given by the

chief for a brave deed; Bob kà w ṅgu’ mfa ma

ntǎ̤d mfàòn, bo pob ;, ntsi’ i ni Sama, i sò mfè ban ni ṅkàb-
nswi’ kè ni tsǒ̤ tu Bob caught a red-feathered bird and
brought it to the palace: they honoured him, installed

him as Sama and stuck a red feather on his cap of

fibres or on his hat;

= L’:

ṅgàṅ-sòtisuṅ tale bearer, scandal monger;

ṅgàṅ-sòbni mourner, grieving person, melancholic person;
ṅgàṅ-soṅti-mbṳ̯m reconciler; mà soòṅti mbṳ̯m bo̤ ndzo̤

mǒ’ mùn bǒ̤ mběd měǎ’ yum, dzaṅ we i, i bi’ni mà dzaṅka̤d,
ṅgam suṅ ṅgâ, i ni ndzaṅ titi, mbi’ i kà běd ṅwà’ni ba i a.
le ṅgàṅ-sodṅti-mbṳ̯m to, nnyṅ ni ntsù i boà ntsi,
nsuṅ ṅgâ, tw masi, i twi mbum le boà ntsi masi, ndziti
ndǎ’ ṅwà’ni le, dzàṅ i foti cowrie shells are used, when
a person refuses to accept s.th. and is then attacked

by a disease and becomes seriously ill; the oracle says
that he is ill, because he had refused to accept a letter
from his father; the reconciler comes and puts some
water and cowries into his mouth and tells him to spit
them out; he spits them out with the water and he

then takes the letter and is healed; § sigàṅ-fa kàn;
ṅgàṅ-sǒ̤’ mbùbti stammerer; ṅgàṅ-suṅn prattler, babbler;
ṅgàṅ-suǐ̌’ndzi washerman, –-woman; ṅgàṅ-suǐ̌’ku’ woman who
“washes away’ the widowhood from a widower;

ṅgàṅ-s witi-(tso̤̍ṅni) mvi searcher, inguirer;

ṅgàṅ-s wi’nimbu̯nńàmntsi milker, milkmaid; ṡgàṅ-tabo
violent person; v̇gaàṅ-tandzi tailor; ṅgàṅ-tàni nù doubter ,
sceptic; trader, merchant ṅgàṅ-ta̤̯mk̤̍kad
grass basket maker; v̇gàṅ-famctsǒ̤ tu cap maker;

ṅgàṅ-t’ bǎmmfòm man who wants to replace the king
with himself; overthrower , usurper; § fuṅ-wi-mfàòn;
ṅgàṅ-fomti (mùn) assistant, helper; ṅgàṅ-tǎnṅki’ charcoal-
burner; (ṅgàṅ-foṅ person with an umbilical rupture or

big navel; ṅgàṅ-ťṅ glutton, excessive eater;

ṅgàṅ-taṅndoṅ trumpeter, horn blower;

ṅgàṅ-toṅntaṅ trombonist, trumpeter;

ṅgàṅ-to’-màndzi (-lùṅ) pioneer, leader (for salvation) ;
ṅgàṅ-to tilo’bùàn quarrelsome person, denouncer;

ṅgàṅ-to titsà̤̍ṅnińwà’ni Nikoòb interpreter of the Scriptures;
Muslim a man who touches the ground with
his head when praying; pitiful, merciful
person; ṅgàṅ-fsaṅ prisoner; § ṡkwan-b̤̀d;

ṅgàṅ-fsa’nù despiser; ṅgàṅ-tfsàè’nib̤d army officer, leader
in warfare; ṅgàṅ-fsi salt-seller, salt-trader; ṡgàṅ-tsi-làm
blacksmith, smith; ṅgàṅ-tsitṳnńama coppersmith;
ṅgàṅ-tsi’ a my creator; ṅgàṅ-tsi’mvi creator of the world;
ṅgàṅ-tsi’ntuṅ deaf (partly); ṅgàṅ-tsi’ntṳ̯m brave, courageous
person; -tso’ nsòṅ, extractor of teeth; also an abusive word,
used by the Bameta for insulting the Baliwomen, because
of having extracted the two upper frontal incisors at the
age of twelve;

ṅgàṅ-tso’ntuṳ̯’ Nnkòb trespassers, renegates; § ṅgàṅ-fso’nù
ṅgàṅ-tfsǒ̤dsa’ judge; ṅgàṅ-tso̤tinù herald, proclaimer;
ṅgàṅ-tfso̤finùmfi news monger, gossip;

ṅgàṅ-tso̤’ni hothead, hotspur; false

 

= .

prophet, liar; ṅgàṅ-tsutsu prophet, speaker of the
word of God;

ṅgàṅ-tswembo awkward fellow, clumsy person;
ṅgàṅ-tswitibùn tempter, seducer; guesser
or taler of riddles; ṅgàṅ-tfummbgyṅ also: fǎ̇̇-mbuṅ magician;
ṅgàṅ-tumntsù babbler, chatterbox, twaddler;

ṅgàṅ-tṳ̯n strong, powerful person; (̇gàṅ-fṳ̯nniba̤d fighting
hero, warrior; ṅgàṅ-tṳ̯nninù zealot, fanatic;

ṅgàṅ-ť̤ntu queer fellow, obstinate, stiffnecked person;
ṅgàṅ-tṳ̯’ndab one who entrusts his house to s o.;
ṅgàṅ-tṳ̯’ndab bo̤ màùn, i ni mbi γǒ̤ ma ṅgoòṅ-tum, nna ti

kě bi mb yγǎṅ-fà’ bi ṅgâ, bo beb kě bi kwà’ mboòṅka̤d,

le bo i̇gâ, i tṳ̯’ nda i the man vho is acting as a tes-
tator, is the one who is about to go abroad and is
showing all his goods to his labourers, so that they
watch them carefully, i.e. he entrusts his house to them;
ṅgàṅ-t’ṳ̯’ vu one who draws up his last will; if an old
man is about to die, he draws up his last will and says,
if I die, bury me over there’; he divides his possessions
amongst his children; he makes his testament;
ṅgàṅ-vo̤’timu’ fireman, fire-brigade; huntsman,
hunter; ṡgàṅ-vo̤̍ṅn foolish person; epileptic;
ṅgàṅ-wǎdńàm butcher; artisan, artist, crafts -
man; the man who honours the cowrie;
ṅgàṅ-womti mbuṳ̯m kà we’ mbu̯m ni tu ṅgwi i; ṅgâ, bùn
ṅgomti ṅgwi i the man who honours the cowrie had
tied a wreath of cowries onto the head of his wife, so
that people would honour her;

ṅgàṅ-yěboṅ benefactor; (̇gàṅ-yḃ’ villain, evil-doer,
wrong-doer; ṅgàṅ-yěfù preparer of medicine, physician;
ṅgàṅ-yèmti helper; ̇gàṅ-ynǔěk̯̍bi faithless, perfidious,
disloyal person;

one practising sexual vices, fornicator;
iniquitous worker, malefactor, criminal ;
ṅgàṅ-yěnɑ̌mfo̤ka̤d unchaste, morally loathsome person.

ṅgàṅ, n. (a-ma) rooct, vein, string;
ṅgǎṅǩ’ colocasia root; ṙgṅ̇tsuṅ couch grass roots;
ṅgǎṅṅgǒ̤ grass roots; ṅgǎṅtṳ root of a tree; ṅgǎṅmi
neck; ṡgǎṅmi-mbavṅ neck of a pot (calabash).

ṅgàṅgyed, n. bow, arrow; yed cross-bow
ṅgaṅ, n. lover of, amateur of s.th.
ṅgaṅ, interj. no;
ṅgaṅ’ ṅgaṅ no, never vṡgayà I say Not’ ṙ̇gayù e?’ ou

say No? he says No we say Not”
ṅgaynn e? o you say No’? ṅgayàb they say Not

 

= 262: =

ṅgaṅsṳ̤̀ṅâ, n. guinea fowl; § suṅgwi

ṅga’, n. feruit of a special tree, the round kernel is edible;
ṅga’ ni ndza̤m bo̤ ni; ndṳ̯’ ma koòb; ù Iǐ’n mà b ṅgod ṅga’
ma fà’ u tina’ fruit grows on a climber in the forest;
you can even plant the fruit on your farm;
ndzòm bo̤ m’ ntam ty, yi, à bo̤ nazo̤ bi a, lâ à
dzn tie the feruit of a tree which is like an apricot
and tastes like cola, but is very bitter .

ṅga’ bo, pl. ṅga’mbo (a-ma) shoulder
ṅga’ṅgà’, adj. corneous; edged, angular

ṅga’ṅga’ ńàm, n. armadillo (manis tetradactylae), loo-l2o cm long
reptile, with a bony armour; i ni ndzid ndzǒ̤̍ ṅga ṅga’
ńàùm she bvalks like an armadillo; this is said to ridicule
s.o. who is walking in a wriggly manner.

ṅga’ti, v. also: ṅa’ti open

ṅga’ti, n. bark of a tree sp.; § ya’dzi

ṅga’tìga’ti, adj. not smooth, with marks or scars
ṅga’ù̯γa’̯̍,, adj. open, opened (of a doopr) ;. § ya ̤̯
ṅge, n. roof truss

ṅged, n. also: ṅgo̤d breed of; v̇̇ged kokù breed of jiggers;
ṅged kokùù dzam ni kàù u titi you have plenty of jiggers
on your foot.

ṅged ntèd breed of lice; ma mon le ni nta’ ṅged ntèd ni tu mon i
the mother of that child is looking for lice on her child’s
head.

ṅgèn, n. grasshopper, also̤ a kind of beetle, smaller than
grasshoppers; everyone uses them for food; § v̇ggṳ̯m

ṅ(gèni, n. also: ṅkèni kind, manner, sort (always used with a p.
dem.); mùn le this person’s manner;
ṅgèni mɑ̌n à le a man of this kind;
ṅgèni bùn be teohese kind of people;
ṅgèni bùn bò people of this kind;
yd ṅgèni nù this kind of thing;
yd ṅgèni ṅgo̤’ this kind of trouble; § nd

ṅgu̍kten, n. runaway, deserter; mi’ ṅgo̤̍ken ndan ntfsàmbad (Pr.)

 

 

m n

the runaway’s eyes become clear, when he reaches the
top of the mountain, (where he can see how far his
goal still is and would rather return to his master
whom be has lefft).

ṅgì, n. animal, similar to an antelope, but with longer horns

ṅgom, n. spasm in fingers or foot; cramp

ṅgom fà’, n. pl. of (γ) wom fà’ farm beds

ṅgomndab, n. also; ṅgɑ̌mndab truss, supporting framework of roof

ṅgòn, n. maid, girl, virgin; girl whose mother is a des-
cendant of the blacksmith’s guild; ṡgònndam bride;
§ ndu-ṅgònndam, moṅgòn; ṅgònndza̤gm a married sister;
ṅgònnsu girl of the Bǎtikalì (a group of Bali, dwelling
near the Basel Mission station); ṅgoòn-ṅg wa̤d girl whose
mother is a caescendant of the Mosgamoc-people;
ṅgwen-ṅgwa̤d the boy of that mother; (̇goòn-rṅkun maid
from the Mankon; (̇goòn-sofà’ honorary name given to
the women of the Grassfield, because they are using a

shovel; § bàṅgoònṅgoòn

ṅgòn, n. basket; ̇goòn-ndo’ basket with a quadratic base with slight-
ly concave outlines and straps attached at the corners

ṅgònṅgòn, n. pl. bà-ṅgònṅgòn virgin

ṅgob, n. hen, fovwl; v̇g̍bnesi duck; ni nta’ti ntsa’ the hen
is scratching the ground; § f(iko̤ṅgob, kàṅgob, bo̤’ṅgob,
mbùmṅgob, kṳ̍kaṅgob, ntsoò niṅg̤ob

ṅgòblì, n. hook, crotch, clasp; ṅgobi-wě-baṅ anchor; § (γ) w̌b

ṅgobńo, n. Boa constrictor, python; § ńo

ṅgokù̯liog, n. dauail

ṅgòlitòṅ, n. big navel, umbilical rupture

ṅgom, n. pl. wom (a-ba) husband s mother-in-law

ṅgom, nu. tenth; à fa v̇kab le (nṅgom is’ e?’ how many tenth are

you going to give? vì̇ìgom iba keè ited kà itan twenty
or thirty or fifty; § kwàṅgam, tedi̇gam = (ṅgomited

= 2 -

ṅgòṅ, n. country, town, village; ṙgoòdṅ-bàkubùn realm of the dead;
ṅgoòdṅ-fom ruins of a town; § fomí̇goòṅ; ṅgoṅ-lu̯ṅ a famous
or renouned town or country; ntsi island;
ṅgòṅ-sani γo̤̍o̤’ midnight; abroad;
hell; § dzaṅ, nsibàṅ, ntobnsi -ṅgoòṅ

ṅgòṅfòm, n. destroyed town; § fòm(̇goṅ

ṅgòṅ- me’, nu. total sum, all; bùn me’ all people;
ṅgoòṅ nɑ̌ lùṅ me’ all things concerning life.

ṅgòṅgòṅ, adj. town after town, every town or place

ṅgoṅ, n. also: ṅgoṅfà’ garden-or farm-bed, furrow; fig. wrinkle; mi’ mi
mi bi’ni mà ṅgoṅ bi his face is starting to get wrinkles;
ṅgoṅfà’ ṅkwàtikwaàti a hoed garden bed; § myctaàti-ṅgoṅfà’

ṅgoṅṅgɑ̌ṅ, adj. every bed, bed after bed
ṅgòṅnìmâku̯b, n. also; ṅgòṅnìtitâtsu’ millepede, myriapod

ṅgoṅṅkalì, n. garden bed with burnt grass (on the exact. place
where the bed is supposed to be, grass is heaped on it
and covered with the soil from last year’s bed);
ù bǒ̤ mfâ’ ṅgoṅkal, ù nuyṅ ṅgo̤ madzi (ṅgoṅfà’, ni ṅkobti
ni ntsa’, ntǎn ni mu’, à ti’ ṅgoṅṅkali; ndzindzimu’ ntum
ndzo̤̍ ṅgàb iba, mu’ dzi vo f you dig a you
heap up grass inbetween the bed and cover it with soil,
you then put fire to it, it thus becomes a new
it smokes some two veeks, before the fire dies.

ṅgò’. n. tree sp. (with very hard wood, useful for tools, axe, handles)

ṅgò’, n. rock, big stone; ndkàṅ fflint (of the flint-lock-
gun); yo̤, nsoòṅ mi nadzo̤ ṅgoòd’ndikàṅ look, his teeth are
like the flint of the flint lock = not sharpened with
a file which is the custom of the grassfield people ;
this is to mock people with normal teeth.

ṅgò’, interj. o, oh, vmhat; v̇go’, i tenten (ṅgǒ̤ ma (ṅgwa̤n what, he
ran off and went to the field ; § ndziṅgà

ṅgo’, n. winged termite, edible; ̇go’ kà fṳ̯yd ni mfńùìm the
termites swarmed out at night; small,
winged termite; § ns ’ṅgo’, sǎmṅgo’

ṅgɑ̌’ṅgɑ̠̌’, adj. big; i ni ṅkiti a ni ṅǧ’ ṅǧ’ mi’ he looks at me
with big (widened) eyes; i ni ndzid ni ṅgǒ ’ ṅǧ ’ ṅkù
he strides with his long leges.

 

 

= 21:

ṅgo̤̤, n. grass; v̇go̤ kwi’ ma fà’ the grass on the farm grows
exuberantly; § azàaci, tǒ̤§̌ to̤ṳ

ṅgo̤, adj. also: ṅgo̤ni open, opened, hollow;
ntsoɑ̤̌ndab tsi ṅgo (-ni) the door of the house is open.

ṅg̍d, n. also: ṅgèd race, breed, seed, family, generation;
ṅgo̍d bùn generation; young plant of k.;
ṅgo̍d kěǎědzṳ̯ seed of nourishing plants; ṡgo̤̍d ku’ young
plant of colocasia; rìgod ṙg wàfṳ̯d seed of maize;
ṅgod ńṳ’ young plant of cutter grass; § ntoò mi = (god ;,
nsò’

ṅgǒdmbṳ̯̀ṅ, n. hailstone, pellet of hail; ̇go̤dmbo̤̤ṅ vu it hails, hail falls.

ṅgo̤ṅgo̤ mi’ , adv. with the twinkling of an eye ; i kiti ni ṅgo̤ṅgo̤ mi’
he looks with frightened eyes.

ńgo̤ṅgo, adj. perforated; lo’ le bo̤ ̇go̤ ṅgo̤ the calabash has many holes.

ṅgǒ̤ṅg̍ṅ, adv. also: same kind, similar way;
i mà (ṅkṳ ndzě m ṅka bo̤ he will never do
the same again; i ni ndzě ṅgǒ̤̇ṅgo̤̍ṅ ndzo̤ ba i he works
in a similar way to his father.

ṅǧ̤o, n. snake-grass = grass, poisonous snakes have spit on
and therefore made it dangerous for barefooted people;
ù dza ti ṅǧ̤-ńo you walked through snake-grass, your
feet are swollen; § ńo

ṅgo’, n. pl. of γò’ (ta-ma) cheek; ṙgo̤̍’ ma, i lum ny right cheek;

i tam bò i ni ṅgǒ̤ mfa̤d i he slapped his brother’s cheek.
n. (a-ma) single glowing coal;

ṅgǒ̤̌ mu’ γo̤’ ti the coal is glowing very much; §

sě, kikè’mu’

ṅgo̤ě , n. nisery, affliction, pain, calamity ;
ni ntsu’ ṅgo̤’ at the day of misery; ṅgo̤’ simni mṳ̍ nd i
affliction overwhelmed him; rv̇go̤’ dzṳ i pain swallowed
him up; vṡgo̤’ sa i misery overpowered him; m; ni ndzo̤
ṅgo̤’ ti I am undergoing trouble; § bunù

ṅgǒ̤§-fɑ̌§m, n. poverty; ṙgo̤’ f’m tso nd (i̇go̤̍d Gwandima poverty
struck the clan of Gwandima.

ṅgù, n. edible roots (these roots are cooked unpeeled and then
eaten; now hardly ever planted ), they can also be eaten
rav like a kind of carrot. ;

- 26 -

ṅgù, n. magic medicine to detect thieves ;
yum màùn bǒ̤ mvo̤, bo yo, nno nduṅ mà lh màn fe, i
dzǒ̤ yum le a; bo o’ tita, nngṅ ni mi’ bùn, màùn i dz̤
yum ie a, tita tso ni mi’ mi; mùn i mà nadzǒ̤ bo a, cita
ti tso ni mi’ mi boo̤ if someone loses s.th., people go
and drink magic medicine in order to detect the thief;
they take pepper and put it into people’s eyes; the pepper
will then penetrate the eye of the person who has been
thieving, but it will not penetrate the eye of a person
who has not stolen; §

ṅgùb, n. skin, hide, leather; ṅgbbàṅ red leather;
ṅgùbko̤d or ṅgùbtuko̤d foreskin, prepuce; ṅgùbkwen
lizard’s hide; ṅgobli’ eyelid; hide, used by
the mother to carry a child on her back; § koyâ mon,
ba’ndzifu; ṅgùbmùn mamn-’s skin; ṅgùbṅku̍ndòṅ semi-dried
shaft of the leaf of the banana stem; (̇gùbńm animal j
hide; ṅgùbsisi black leather. j

, n. also; ṅgɑ̌mńìm hedgehog, porcupine ;
ṅgùbtǎṅ, n. bug; v̇gobtàṅ dzam ti ma y’ a lot of bugs are here.

ṅgud, n. handle (of knife, hoe, shovel, sword, etc.) ;
ṅgudmuni handle of knife

ṅguka̤d, n. pl. bàwukqd, wuka̯d or vuka̯d the old one, the elder;
i ṅguka̯d à heis ny elder, he is older than I;
bo wauka̤ d they are our elders, are older than us;
ba ṅguka̯d the elder brother of my father;
nǎ mo ṅguka̯d the elder sister of my mother;
tǎṅgwi yṳ’ ṅguka̯d ny feather’s elder sister;
nimbàṅ y̤’ ṅguka̯d my mother’s elder brother;
doǎǒ mu ṅguka̯d ny grandfather’s elder brother;
kaǎ mù ṅguka̤d my grandmother’s elder sister;
nd̤̀n ṅgukaad an old person; § ko̤ṳ̯ ṅguka̯d, wu’

ṅguli, n. ssoubstantiality, genuineness, purity, usefulness, actuality ;
ṅguli bi edible kernel of the cola nut;
ṅgulimùBa’ni a genuine Bali; v̇guli ndù’ pure palmwine;
ṅguli esu a true word; riguli yùm a my valuable thing,
my important matter; i̇guli ṅgoòṅ the true homaeland;
ṅguli-mùn big man; § Ba ni

ṅgɑ̌lum, n. cyclone, whirlwind

 

ṅgùm. n. cry for help (of amazement or fear), expressed by
beating the palm of the hand onto the lips, while soun-

--

ding a long-drawn u-u-u-u; i bu’ ṅgùm be calls for help;
ṅgùm tsu ya e?’ vbhere are they crying?

ṅgùm, n. one side of a roof; ṅgǒnndab rooftruss, roofframe;
§ du ṅgùm

ṅgùmba, n. pl. bàṅgùmba hangman, privy counsellor, pr. counsel;
also: instruments belonging to them;
à ni mbo̤ ni ndib bd, mṳ̍ṅg wi tsam ṅgùmba (Pr.)
in war-time even a woman may carry Ngumba instruments
which she would not even look at in normal times;
it means: necessity knows no law.

ṅguṅgaṅ, n. dress for dancing
ṅgùṅli’, n. pl. ṅgùṅmi’ eyebrow, eyelashes

ṅgù’, n. period, epoch; ṅgɑ̌’mvi space of time;
’mvi nda̤dka̤d hard times; § (̇g’moi

ṅgu’, n. bird with red feathers

ṅgu’, n. war dance, dance of victory (to honour the hero); ,
mfòn dzǎ ṅgu’ mbo i the chief glorifies him;
bo dzǎ màùn le ni ṅgu’ they honour him with a gift;
§ az, ń̤̌ṅ, dzṳ, su’, tsaṅ

ṅgɑ̌’mvi, n. in those days; à kà bo ni ṅǧ’mvi be it was in those
days; §

ṅǧ’ṅgù’, adj. aged, antiquated, lasting many years; ṅǧ ṅgù’ndab =
old houses; nàm, bàṅg - ṅgù ńàm

old animal(s) :; ṅgď’ṅgù’ mbaṅ old pot; § wu’

ṅgù

c:

wù’u̯, adj. shut (of sliding door); § wo̤̍

ṅguṳ̯, adj. great, big; v̇k’ ṅgṳ̯ big basket;
bàùn great people; § wu’

ṅgub, n. palmwine-calabash with a long bent neck and a small
opening at the top end of the neck, which serves as
outlet and also a big opening at the base of the neck,
serving as inlet, used for serving palmwine from a big
pot; ṅgo̍b le san ma taàd, le bo ṅgâ, mon ku ni bo nǎ i
kè mbà nǎ i (Pr.) that calabash broke in the big pot

of wine - teohae child died in its mother’s arms, or: you

s- 26 -

chased the hawk away from the chicken and by mistake
you trod on one of the chicken.

ṅgṳli, n. a song, sung in a house of mourning

ṅgulàṅ, n. skin disease which causes itching rashes on the body;
a rhizome which is used for treating this; § ṡko̤ṅko̤̍ṅ

ṅgṳ̯m, n. pl. bàṅg̯m migratory locust; bo w (igṳ̯m they went
to catch migr. locusts (for food) ; the whole
of the town’s population; § ṡgèn

ṅgùn, n. pl. vùn guest, stranger; à bǒṅ mà kǒṅ ṅg̤̍nm ntsǎ nto̤m ù
you had better love a stranger rather than a hypocriti-
cal friend (who pretends to be a friend of the family,
but is a spy).

ṅgù̀ṅ, n. (-ma) stiff pap of Indian corn; flour, bread jgoṳṅ le
mg̤̍ the pap became stiff; mboû’̤̌ ṅg̤̍ṅ the stiff pap moul-
ded into balls or loaves; honey bread;
maize bread; v̇go̤̍ṅka̤̍ko’ unleavened bread; maize
bread given by the mourners in the case of the death
of a firstborn only people who have already
lost children through death, may eat ist:; vṡg̤ṅ̤ṅkoò’ millet
(of Mauretania), andropogum Sorghum, as an offering
often put up outside the door and left there, until
the birds have eaten all the seeds, hence: ńikoòb;
ṅg̤ṅṅko’ka̯d leavened bread (bibl); ’tsǐ’ show-
bread which can be kept for another time; §
ṅǧ̤ṅ, , ika-’- , iiku-’- , tsa’-
kènde; tsu, kwà̀’ti, lom, bu’

f san

ṅguńàm, n. pl. bàṅgù̀nàm leopard; (ṅg̤̍ńàìm nswedka̤d fierce leopard

ṅgu̍ṅgàṅ, n. woooden toy, top

ṅguṅgàṅ, n. dress for dancing

ṅgu̍ṅgàṅ, n. black ant; court bo tg (Pr.) the court is like
the tree is for the ant; it climbs up and falls down
without getting anything, but nevertheless it teries
again and again; § naz̤d

ṅguṅgo̤̍, n. a herb sp.. used to speed up childbirth

ṅguṅgṳ, adj. intensive and plural form of big, great

ṅgusàd, n. sling (to sling stones with, etc.); Pavid kà tam (Goliath
ni ṅgo̤sàd . hit G. with the sling;

 

2 -

b̤̍ṅku̯ ni nta̤m bṳsuṳṅ ni ṅgo̤sàd kè ni ked children
shoot birds with a sling or with an arrowv.

ṅgwà, n. children’s round dance

ṅgwàd, n. chisel, cutting instrument; § wd

ṅgwàd, n. women’s scar ornaments, in some cases burnt with
grass, in others cut and afterwards rubbed with ashes
(nsa̤nmbaṅ); ěaounde scars running from the cheeks to

t

the corners of the mouth; ṙìg wàd Bà’ni scars on both
temples; ṅgwàd Bani kà bo̤ yǎb li’mṳ̍; bo kà ṅgwǎd ni
γoro̤’ tsèn tab; bṳ̍wi wad ni tsèn tab, ṅg wǎd ma
ṅgo̤’ mab bà’bà’ the scars of the Bali were their identi-
fication marks; they marked the centre of their fore-
heads; in addition the women had marks on both cheeks;
ṅgwàd-ńikòb ni bǎ§m mùṅgwi, le nà’ti ṅgâ, mu̍§ṅgwi le bo
ni dzṳ̯m the drawing of god’, the light-coloured
stripes on the belly of a woman signify that she is
pregnant; the stripes may also appear on her thighs;
ṅgwàd Bamum vertical scar on the forehead.

ṅgwàd, n. mark of ownership; i kà w̌d ṅg wàd i ndǐ̌ bo he had
stamped them with his seal, with his mark;
ṅgwǎd luṅ-ńàm the mark of the beast’s name (bibl) ;
ṅgwǎd mi’taṅ the mark of the number (bibl.).

ṅgwàd, n. the hangman, executioner; ṅgwàd mùn mboò’ ntso̤’ mṳ̀ńi
titi the executioner fears the edge of the sword;
§ mugpu’, wǎd

ṅgwàdmu’, n. tinder box, matches
ṅgwàdndùùṅ, n. slaughterer’ (thief) of raffia ribs

ṅgwàfu̯d, n. Indian corn, maize; ts fù ikwà, le bo i̇gâ,
à lǎ m(̤̍ ntsǐ musyṳṅ (Pr) the maize has grown four
leaves and so hinders the birds to pick the seed = if
a child has grown up, it cannot die so easily;
ṅgwàfṳ̯d mbṳ̤̍ṅ maize grown in the rainy season;
ṅgwàfṳ̯d ṅko’mvi maize grown in the dry season;
§ bab(li), tǎn, kwali, lo̤m, kaṅ, kò̤mu; ṅgo̤̍ṅ, ntòn,
lam ṅkòṅ ṅgwàfṳ̯d, dzṅ ṅgwàfṳd, mufundàn.

ṅgwàn, n. vhip; small, crippled tree with very
tough wood; § mbibṅg wàn; muṳńiṅg wàn

ṅgwǎndzàd , n. fringe

 

ṅgwǎṅ, n. wall, row, line; wṅnsà̯̤m wall combined with a ditch
or moat; (ig ẇṅka’ fence; one round of a
basket (consisting of grass woven round a pith); § koù’kad

ṅg wàṅṳ, v. surround, enclose
ṅgwàsa, n. hailshot, smallshot (to shoot birds)

ṅgwǎsad, n. children’s toy (consisting of a long string at the end
of which a small bunch of grass is attached) ;
it is swung horizontaly while the partakers jump, in
order to avoid touching the flying string.

ṅgwàsi, n. small apron (2 x 3-o inches), worn by the women to
cover their pudenda and their back, made of bunches
of cloth from special grass;
ṅgwàsi bo̤ iba: ṅgwàsi ku̯sṳ̍̌ wu’, bo nèebti ni ndzi,
ṅgwàsi mandz̤̀m, bo nèbci ni ṅgo̤̤ kè
there are two small aprons: the one in front is made
of cloth, the one behind is made of grass or of
banana leaves; § moṳtsàguṳyaâ

ṅg wàtiwàti, adj. shred, barklike, rough; full of cuttings;
mbùm ty gàùba le bo (̇gwàtiwaàti the stem of the
Gubatree is like bark; mo’ dzoòm (plum tree) kà
dzàù’γṳ̯ ma fà’ a, ṅ’ ṅgwàti ṅgâ, à ku a plumtree became
too big on ny farm, I cut around the bark, and it died;
§ waàd

ṅgwa’, n. loan society; the money received on loan by this society;
society of any kind;
bo m’ ṅgwa’ they pay money for their society;
ṅgwà’ bon-buṳ̯mbàṅ nta’ni ṅkù mab sě ni b le, ni ńńṳṅni
juveniles also rub their feet with camwood- powder
and dance; v̇gwa’ bo̤ṅkṳ̯ the little ones; ma ntso kànti
ṅgwa’ bo̤ it is no good to enter the money club, while
it has already started its round = do not interfere in
a dispute, if you do not know it’s cause; § ndíṅgwa’,
mǎ’, ṅgwa’

ṅgwa̤d , n. (a-ma) ail, palmoil, fat, grease, butter; ṅg wa̤ dmu̍ńùṅ
oil of the palmkernel; ṅgwa̤d nda̤mka̤d also: ṅgwa̤d ntso̤’kaàd
strong smaelling palmoil (due to using rotten oilfruits
in it’s production. as it is usually practised in age);
ù dzṳ̯ kěǎě, ndǎ’ ṅgwa̤d, nta’ni ntsǐ mǔ̯
you have eaten (stolen) a useful thing, then taken some
oil and rubbed in the mouth of a child (to pretend that
the child had stolen it); this is said, when a person
tries to hide a great crime by small trifles ;

 

 

ṅgwa̤ d ni ndo’ ni mbàn, in bàṅ; ṅgwa̤ d mùńàṅ làò’ n; wolo’
mbàṅ tohae ail from the oilpalm feruit is red, the oil of
the kernel is pressed from the fruit’s kernel (used for
cosmetic); bo mà ni ndzuy (ṅgwa̤d mṳ̍ńàṅ ni kědzṳ bo̤, bo
ni ndzuṳ̯ bo̤ ni fù mbi’ dzaṅ (ndzo̤̍ mfo̤’ nt̤̍nka̤d kè dzanṅ-
kernael oil is not used in food, it is only taken
with medicine, e.g. against a severe cold or against
gastritis; bo ni ndzy ṅgwa̤d bàndoṅ bo̤ ni; fù caster oil
is taken with medicine.

ṅgwa̤dkù, n. a complaint of the sole of the foot

ṅgwa̤(n, n.

field, soil, ground, garden;

γyàb b̌ṅ ma (ṅgwa̤n it is good to share, whilst still in
the field (or on the way, because otherwise the number
of partakers will increase steadil y);

ṅgwa̤n yǒ̤ mṳ̍, ndz̤̀m tso̤d the people returned from
the field, the last one passed; vg w̤nb̤d battlefield.

ṅgwàtìwa̤ti, adj. also: ṅgwotìwo̤̍kli trembling; § wà̤ti

ṅg wèn, n.

ṅg wèn, n.

ṅgwen, v.

beauty, ornament., fine dress, extravagance;
kěṅgweèn finery, ornaments, trinketry; ṅg wèn ndzèyě
carnality, lewdness, prostitution; § ṅg wènṅg weèn, nɑ̌̌ṅg wèn

riddle, tale, legend, fiction;

ṅgwen nadzobtidzòbti story, legend which is sung, not
only told; ṅgwen ntudtud riddle, tale which is only
told; § adzoòbtiṅg wèn

whistle, pipe

ṅgwènṅgwèn, n. pl. bà- ṅgwěnṅgwèn (à-ba) young man, youth, young-

ster:; ṅgwènlàm son of a mother belonging to the

blacksmith’s guild; § ṡgnlàm; ṅgwěnnsu offspring of
the Batikali; ṙg wěnṅgwa̤d son of a women from ba-
kobṅgwaṅg; § ṅgǒnṅg wa̤d; ṅgweěnṅkun son of a women
from Bafreng or Mankon; vig wěnsofà’ honorary name
given to the men of Bali and Bamum who work with a
hoe on their farm or in their garden; miyà ka nǎ take
iìt easy, mother esponse: vs, ka ṅgwensofà’ yes, man
of hoes’ (The man who greets this mother, comes
from the family who use boces: vṡìgwennsu the area
from Prescraft to the Pres byterian Ghurch). bàTikali
bo̤ bàṅgwěnnsu the Tikali people are fishermen; miyà,
ka nǎl ṅ, ka (ṅgwěnnsu take it easy mother esponse:
yes, man of teohe fisher’s family’ Saluting a chief is
different: bo ni mfa womti mbò mfòn ṅgâ, Tsàb̤̤̀ = i
tsa bàfòn me’, also: Tsàb̀ ṅgṳ̍ńùm or the chief

=2 2 =

is honoured with Tsàbù̯’ which means he surpasses all
other chiefs, even a leopard or he is as strong as the
biggest tree.

ṅgwi, n. pl. wi, bu̯̍òwi or bàwi wife, but woman;
ṅgwi mfò bà-English the ̤ueen of England;
ṅgwi à ny wife; wi bi his wives.

ṅgwin, n. dried vegetable, dried fruits, e.g. sweet potatoes or banana
ṅgwòn, n. also: ṅgòn or ṅgònndo’ small basket
ṅg w̤tiṅgwo̤ti, adj. trembling; § (̇g w̤tiṅg w̤ti

ṅgye, n. place where they swear or curse; name by which they
swear

ṅgyâdyed, adj. astonishing, surprising, strange, wonderful; § yed

ṅka, n. thing, aim, interest, in favour of, self;
ù tsi mè ni ṅka ko̤ e? for what reason are you here
- in such a state?
bùn, bo tsi nto̤̍n a, mà ṅǩ’ ntsi ntò̤n ni; yǎb ṅka bo̤
no longer do the living live for themselves;
i to yi (mu ṅka he came on his own accord.

ṅka, cj. because of; à bǒ̤ nda’ mbo̤, bub, ṅka nàù le, ù sǎb mbo mù
a, la’ mi nd u lit: if it is to be so, because of the matter
you had sworn to me, the oath will be lifted from you.

ṅka times (multiplication) ;
iba ṅka iba = ikwa two times two is four.

ṅka, cj. then, (following conditional clauses which are neg. by
ti mà), = similar to mbo;
ù bǒ̤ nda’ ṅgo̤ ù, mbo̤̍ mu la’ ro, Iǎ, ù ti mà nda’
ṅgo̤ ou̯’ ù bo̤, ṅkâ mu̯ mà ni nda’ yγo̤ bà bo̤ if you come
with me, then I will go, but if you do not come with
me, then I shall not go at all.

ṅka, n. raffia vinifera; ṅkamboù’ stronger kind of raffia, grows
esp. in Moghamo; § - mbo’, - ṅka, kǐ̌’ṅka, nd, nd,
tso̤bṅka, vaṅka, ndù’ṅka, ntǎ̌ṅka

ṅka, n. times; bàṅka twice; ṅka issuṳ’ e?’ how many times?
ṅka ku̯sṳ̯ the first time; ṅkàmod’ perhaps; ṅka ndzamuy
many times; rìkarńim at once, quick, once and for all;
§ ṅka, ṅkaṅka

 

 

s

ṅka, n. stroke, blow, cut; ṅkamuyńi sword stroke;
ṅkaṅgwàn blow with a whip; ṅkambo handful.

ṅkab, n. money, goods, riches, price, reward, fee, wages;
ṅkab custòm duty, tax; ṅkabfà’ wages; ṅkab mùṅg wi
dowry, payable to the woman’s relations;
ṅkab mṳ̍ṅgwi mà ni mmi bi boo̤ the payment of the
dowry never ends, you can pay all the time, her
kindred will never stop asking;
ṅkab mfoònfǎn mà ni ṅkud ndab bo̤ (Pr.) riches found
will not build a house = money you have not worked
for, but got in some way or other will soon be spent
without having resulted in real good; ṅkab-yèmti-bùn
subsidy, financial aid; § som, seti, tsa̤d, tu’

ṅkab, n. hollow of the hand; i bad bo i ni; ntsù, ntoṅ ṅkab
he puts his hand against his mouth and whistled.

ṅkàbnswi’, n. a black cap made of dry raffia bast
ṅkad, n. (a-ma) walk, journey; § kad

ṅkadmvi, n. pl. bàṅkadmvi vagabond, land-raker
ṅkàkǎ, adj. coarse-grained; kind of grinding stone
ṅkalì, n. garden-bed with burnt grass in its furrows

ṅkam, nu. thousand ; ṙkam iba two thousand; ṡkam ikwaà ni
b)
bǎṅgam four thousand and twenty

ṅkàmbo’, n. (a-ma) shoulder

ṅkàmbo’, n. dwarf bean, (named so, because they are carried
on the shoulder’’)

ṅ(kǎmdù, n. pl. of kǎmdù honeycomb
ṅkàmò’, adv. perhaps; § ndimo’
ṅkamtìkamti, adj. solid (food), chewable; § kam

ṅkàn, n. prohibitor; ù bo̤ ṅkàm (ńâga e?’ are you the prohibitor
of the Nyaga dance? (once a day Galega, the Bali chief
sent out his aldermen to announce the prohibition of
this dance, but upon reaching the dancing place they
began to dance themselves): you better stop doing what
you forbid others to do; § kn

= 2 -

ṅkan, n. age, monckey; ṙkan bàṅ red monkey (cercopithecus
ruber); kà na̤ bti tu mon ji titi, ṅgw mbùbti
the monkey went to dress it’s child ’s head, so much, so
until it had spoiled everything = three times cut and still
too short; mo (̇kan ni ntad, ni botṳ, nǎ i ni ntad
ntsṳ̯m wu’ a the young monkey jumps from the same
tree branches as it’s mother = like father like son;
§ ṅkoṅṳ

ṅkàṅ, n. troup, host, band, herd, flock; bo esu’ ṅkàṅ boà bàyan
they join the gang of thieves; § tsu’

ṅkaṅ, n. pl. of kaṅ plate, bowl
ṅkaṅ, n. (a-ma) beer, maize beer; § mba̯d-ṅkaṅ

ṅkǎṅba̤n, n. dancing of men in a big circle, a line of dancers;
tso ma enter the line of dancers.

ṅkàṅka, adv. ever, every time; (̇kàṅka me’, or stronger:
ṅkàṅka me’ all the time; § sika

ṅkâṅkaṅ, adj. broiled. grilled. roasted, fried; § kan
ṅkaṅ-màndzì, n. road, path
ṅkańin, adv. at once, quick

ńkàwo̤mbòwoge (real) namse, lit. whose time is with whom =
noone can fix the day of the death of another person.

ṅkà’, n. carved drum for dancing; § ṡkomṅkà’, mbàṅgòm,
ṅkà’, n. measure of capacity, vessel; ̇kà’ k̤̍àsi kerosene pan;

§ ko̍làsi
ṅkà’, n. open field, grassfield; kgṅkà’ in the grassfield;

ṅkoònṅkà’ open steppe; v̇kà’ ku, ṅko̤’ti the steppe
is burnt and very small now; § ko̤k̤ṅṅkà’

ṅka’, n. fence, garden enclosed with a fence: § kud, dz’
ṅkà’dù, n. beehive, apiary; § ̇kà’, doù

ṅkà’kx’’, n. also: ṅkà’ṅka’ a fixed time, or day; § k’
ṅkǎ’mu’, n. torch; § kaàṳ

ṅkà’ṅgṳ̍ṅ, n. mortar, used to pound Indian corn;

 

 

=; 2 -

b̤̍wi bororo mbi tsu’ ṅgo̤̍ṅ ma ṅkà’ṅgo̤̍ṅ ṅǩṅtsu ’ṅgo̤ṅ,
ni ndzob ntsi; b̤̍wi Bà ’ni mbi Iǒ̤m ṅg̤̍ṅ ma wo-ṅgo̤̍ṅ, ni
nadzob ntsi “nas bid wa muli anse mu dzed, mu dzed
muli anse; mgṳ̯wad, mṳ̯wad muli anse’ when the Bororo
women pound their corn with a pestle in a mortar, they
sing; when the Bali women grind their corn on the
grinding stone, they sing a song, imitating the sound of
grinding (using Mu̯bako words); § ṅkà’tsau ṅguṳṅ

ṅka’ṅkwà̯n, n. spine, backbone
ṅkà’tsu’ku’, n. mortar for pounding colocasia roots
ṅkà’tsu’ṅguù̀ṅ § (ṡka’ṅgo̤̍ṅ

ṅka̤nikani, adj. reluctant, ill-willed;
bo bim ṅka̤nika̤ni they agree but reluctantly; § bim

ṅkèd, n. mat, plaited with cleft raffia ribs, used for fences
and wainscoting; mat made of reeds.

ṅkěd, n. pl. of ked (a-moa) a-crrov, bolt; § moked,

ṅkǎěmkèm, adj. zigzag (line, order of planting); bo ni mbi ṅg wàfṳd
ṅkěmkeèm they plant the Indian corn alternately.

ṅkèn, n. pl. of kèn (a-ma) present, gift, donation; § kěn

ṅkèn, n. excuse, apology; ù mà ntum (̇kèn bo̤, mbi’ ko̤ e?
why did you not sent an excuse?

ṅkěn, n. pl. kěn contemporary, of equal age, age group;
bu̯’ ù ni ṅkěn ńin we are of the same age ;
ṅkěn a my age-mate.

ṅkèni kind of; § nd

ṅkěǎěnmùn, n. youngster, youth (male and female) ; ̇kěnmàùn ni mbi
ṅk̤̍ndoòṅ ṅgâ, à ku ntsini ni ntsu’ le, nsa’, ṅkuṳ̯, mbǎṅ, i
wad (Pr.) a youth plants a plantain and expects it to
stand upright, blossom and ripen and become yellow all
on the same day, so that he is able to cut it = the
youngsters have not yet learned to be patient.

ṅkè’ kě’, adj. opened, loosened, unlocked;

ntsùndab (ṅkàè’kě’, tso la the door is open, enter

ṅkibo, n. pl. ṅkimbo (a-ma) fincgernail, claw (of a bird) ;
ṅkimbò mu saà ka d ti your fingernails are very long;

= 26 -

§ kib, kimbo
ṅkikù, n. pl. ṅkiṅkù (a-ma) toe nail

ṅkilàm, n. also : ṅki’làm charcoal; bo ni nnaṅ tṳn madzi làm bo̤ ni
ṅkilàm they cook’ the iron with charcoal in the fire.

ṅkimì, n. finger or toe nail (claw)

ṅkì’, n. small, round basket, plaited with fine stripes;

ṅki ’ ṅko̤’ smaller basket of this kind; ṡk ’ṅkaṅ basket-
for brewing beer; § kwà̤ti

ṅkâmmṅkà’ , n. pl. γǎṅ-kommṅkà’ carver of drums; § korn, ṡkà’
ṅkònṅkà’, n. steppe, grassland, grassy hill; § laṅṅkaà’
ṅkâmtu, n. pl. γǎṅ-kâmtu barber, hairdresser

ṅkânsuṳ̯n, n. pl. γǎṅ-konsṳn person who is ashamed;
ṅkânsuṳ̯n ṅkwa̤ d tsitsweè (Pr.) the ashamed eats (poisonous)
caterpiltars = he cannot speak of his difficulties because
of great shame and so comes to harm;
ṅkânsu̯n kà dzy du̯’ (Pr.) the man who is ashamed has
eaten poison = he cannot decide in a courageous manner
and simply say yes’ or no’; § koni

ṅkobbàṅ, n. ship’s border
ṅkobtikobti, adj. covered, shut; § kobti

ṅkòd, n. quarrel, brawl, fray, combat, fight;
ṅkàd bṅ it is a fierce fight; moòn, i Iǎ’ mḃ ṅkoòd a,
boo̤ wo̤ e?’ vbo has started the cudgelling?
ṅkoòd tso̤d the quarrelling stoped; ṅkoòd tum a bravwl
started; nù be ni mvi bo ṅkoòd these kind of
things only cause a quarrel; § sàṅti, waṅni

ṅkom, n. citizenship, the alderman’s position ;
i kà dzun ṅkom; bo fa i, i dzṳ hae payed for the
citizenship, they gave it to him, he got it.

ṅkom, n. pl. bàkom, komkom, bàkomkom aldermen, senator,
councillor; but: kommfòn chief s councillor ;
ṅkomrṅgòṅ town councillor

ṅkomti so, n. handle for spade

ṅkòndum, n. hostility, enmity, animosity; § ṅgàṅ-ṅkoòndum

 

- 2; -

ṅkòṅ, n. shot, single bullet for muzzle-loader

ṅkò̌ṅ, n. pl. bàǩ̌ûṅ ffriend, lover

ṅkoṅ, n. stalk, stem; stem of the cassava; ṅkoṅmu̯kò’
reed; ṅkoṅṅg wàfṳd stem of Indian corn, empty corn-cob;
ṅkoṅsùsùṅ grass stalk (Pennisetum Benthami)

ṅkò̌̌ṅdzi’, n. (a-ma) nose; § ko̍ka’ ṅkǒṅdzi’,

ṅkoṅffun, n. wasp sp.

ṅkoṅmfṳ̯n, n. the lower leg, shin, shin-bone

ṅkoṅndab, n. pl. of kǒṅndab (a-ma) the vertical poles of the
wall-frame of a house

ṅkǒṅndìkàṅ, n. bullet

ṅkoṅnìndàm, n. chamaelion; ṙkoṅnindàm mà ni ndzid ni ndo̤ bo̤, à
ni ṅkuybti ṅwaà’ i the chamelion does not walk quickly
and it changes its colour.

ṅkoṅnìndàm ndorṅtu, n. chamelion with two horns; à m̌̌ ’ mbom
ṅkoṅnìndàm, yi, ndoṅ iba ni tù i a, à bǒ̤ nnum màùn, i ku
it is a different kind of chamelion which has two horns
on its head; if it bites a person, the person will die.

ṅkò̌ṅntsu’, n. pl. of kǒ̤ṅntsu’ pestle, pounder for fufu

ṅkò̌̌ṅntumtàṅ, n. pl. of kǒ̇ntumtaṅ the fixed raffia ribs on the
big ceiling, forming the eaves

ṅkoṅṅwà’nì, n. pl. of koṅṅwà’nì penholder, lead-pencil
Nkàòṅsǎmba proper name of a town in East-ameroun

ṅkò’, n. trap; ṅkoòd’ ta mṳ̯̍ the trap snapped

ṅkâ’ntan, n. name of the third day preceding the market day

ṅko’ko’, adj. rising, ascending; vu rṅko’ko’ slow death, rising
from the feet upwards; § ko’

ṅko’mvi, n. maize, which is planted in the dry season; ṅgwàfṳd
ṅko’mvi day-break; beginning of dry season.

ṅkò’nì tṳ, n. wood worm sp., wood fretter (about 1 in. wide
and long); § mbobt

=3 2; --

ṅkââ’ntan, n. name of the third day preceding the market day.
ṅko’̤̍ko’ṳ̯, adj. shut up (of a sliding door); § ṅgù’̯wù’u̯
ṅko’ u̯̍ko’u̯, n. vengeance, requital, retribution; § ko’

ṅkṳ, n. pl. kṳ̯̀, also: bàk̤ bachelor, spinster;
i ňṅ ṅko̤̤̍ he or she remains unmarried; § mu̍ṅg wi

ṅkub, adj. left; ̇ko̤bbo lefthanded person; § kob

ṅkobṅk̤̍b, adj. lefthanded, from right to left; § tsu- ṅkoṅko̤b

ṅko̤btiko̤bti, adj. broken into splinters and shivers; § kobci, ṅkwin

ṅkòmon, n. an only child; ta’ ṅko̍mon i ńin his only child

ṅkǒmnso̤n, n. pl. bàkǒmnso̤n lame person

ṅko̤mnsi, n. pl. bàkù̯mnsi person sliding along the ground instead
of walking (owing to lameness of the limbs) ;
bà-ṅko̍mnso̤n mà ndn mà dz’d n; tumbùm yab bo; bùn
ni ṅgyemti yab mà dzd madzi Iǒ̤ì̇ mo̤ěkali, ṅku’ mbo̤ mà
yèmti yab ṅgâ, bo dzṳ tohe paralized cannot walk by
themselves; people are helping them to move by means
of a wheel chair and help them again when eating.

ṅkomtiso, n. also: ṅkṳ̍mtìso handle for hoe or shovel

ṅkṳmù̯ṅgwi, n. pl. bàk̍bù̯wi spinster, unmarried woman; §

ṅko̤ntaṅ, n. pl. bàṅko̤ntaṅ, γǎṅ-ko̤ntaṅ (a-ma) advocate, defender,
intercessor, witness in favour of the accused; § ntaṅ, ko̤

ṅko̤ṅ, n. (a-ma) border, corner, edge; leg of the trian-
gular roof-truss-frame (their base: du’ṅgùm); ṅko̤ṅ-tebi
edge of the table; ṡko̤ṅ-nts; shore, bank ; § maṅko̤ṅ, ni;ṅko̤ṅ

ṅkṅkṅ = also: ṅkṳ̀̇kṳṅ, adj. edged, round the edge

ṅko̤ṅnìko̤ṅni, adj. sloping, steep, at the very border

ṅkoṅṅko̤̍ṅ ntsì, n. river or stream bank

ṅko̤ṅṳ, n. ape, monkey:; § (̇kan

ṅko̤s̯, n. pl. bàṅko̤gṳ̯ (à-ba) eldest son, elder brother; leaders,

overseers, superintendent, principal;
y ṅko̤sṳ̯ mon à that is my first-born child;

 

 

- 2gg -
y ṅko̤sṳ̯ à that is ny elder brother or sister;
i kà ńň’ ṅko̤sṳ̯ bon bǎ-Egypto me’ he killed all the
first- born of Egypt; § ntsàsy

ṅko̤tì, n. pl. bàko̤ti companion, comrade, mate, consort, body guard;
li bo̤̍ ṅko̤ti vu sleep is a consort of death; § koti

ṅkou’, n. also: ṅgob cock
ṅ’ko̤’ ṅgob ni ntoṅ ni ma-mbǎ’mb’, ni nsa’ni bùn ni li
the cock crows early in the morning and wakes up the
people.

ṅko’, adj. ṅko’ṅkoâ̌§ small, little; § ko’

ṅkò’nì, n. feeble person, idler, lazy fellow; § ko̤̤’ni

ṅko̤’tì, n. (ma) vuualgarity, meanness

ṅkpu ’, n. cdead point, ineffectiveness; sa’ le v̤̌ n“–kpu’ the
dispute reached a dead point; § kwatad

ṅku, n. dead body, corpse; ṅkumoùn human corpse; ṡkoí mfad i
his late brother or sister; ba i his late father; § ku

ṅku, n. a kind of slimy, slippery soup, made of herbs;
§ tamntu’, ṅkùkoòb

ṅkùb, n. deceit, cheat, fraud, swindle; i y skùb he is not
willing to pay his debts; § no-ṅkùb, ǩb

ṅkub, n. oisonous snake sp. (short, green, yellow and black,
about So cm long)

ṅkù̌dkɑ̌d , adj. tied, girded (with clothes); building; § kud

ṅkùdmbò, n. (ma) vork, handicraft, earning

ṅkùdni, n. (ma) produce from work, work result

ṅkùkòb, n. soup of herbs; § ṡku, nto

ṅkùm, n. long, open basket; bo̤wi ni ntsam ṅkùm kṳ̍baṅ; bṳ̯mbànṅ
ni ntsa̯m (ṡkùm mbakà the women carry the long

basket, men carry the short one; §

ṅkù’mbad , n. pl. of kumbad fteoot of a hill or mountain

= =

ṅ kǔmbàm, n. also: mâ ṅkwabàm i woven bag with handle
ṅkumtìkumti, adv. joined, stitched up; § kaumsei, ntsu tntsu’ti

ṅkun, n. bean; ṅkàmbo̤â’à dwarf bean; very small
bean, the flower obtained from grinding is mixed
with some water, pepper and salt; this pap is then
wrapped in banamna leaves, tied together and cooked in
water; it then turns into nto wa’; § wa’

n. the firm strip of soil lying just under the projecting
parts of the roof, between the eaves and the wall of
the house; veranda;
mbouṅ bi lo, bo ten, ntsikaàd ma when the
rain comes, people run and stand on the veranda.

ṅkundza̤mmfòn, n. pl. of kundzaàmmfòn body guard of king or
chief; § Ndansi

ṅkun-mù̯kali, n. rice

ṅkunsi, n. pl. of kunsi; pl. also: bàkunsi the deceased;
bo ni ṅka̤ti bàkunsi, ni nsuṅ ṅgâ, bo fa lùṅ mbò bo,
ṅǩ’ mfa bon bou̯̍wi boà bon buṳ̯mbàṅ mb bo; ndǎ’ bon-
b̤̍wi, mb mu̯mbàṅ, i lǎm yab; bo fuṅ bon-b̤̀wi
ṅgâ, fù’, mbi’ bo ni mfuṅ bon-bu̯mbàṅ ṅgâ, γǎṅ-dzṳ-fù’
people make a libation to the ancestors and ask them
to provide them with life, with girls and boys; they
then take the girls and sell them to a man so that he
marries them; the girls are called luck or prosperity
and the boys are said to be the heirs of luck.

ṅkɑntummfàòn, n. pl. of kuntummfòn chief’s messenger ;
§ sdgaàṅntummfàòn

ṅkùntù’, n. pigmy, dwarf; small person (resulting from rachitis).

ṅkùṅ, n. edible caterpillar sp. (cf. tsitswe is the one which is not
edible): red edible caterpillar, esp. living on
a tree, called tyg-f̤̍kaṅ; edible caterpillar,
living on a tree, called fṅfo̤d; § fṳ̍kaṅ, fǎṅfo̤d

ṅkuṅ, adv. before, first; dzà̯ yù ma to ṡkuṅ, ndib mfo̤’ dzǐ k’
hurry up and come before winter;
yg yò nàù ṅkuṅ, ndzi yěè le nù co this work first, after-
wards you may do the other one;
mg yo̤ ṅkuṅ, ndzitǐ m’bim I want to see, before I agree;
m’me’ti yò fà’ ks ṅkuṅ, ndzi to I mill finish this work
first, then I shall come; § ks, dzi, ndziti

 

 

=:g1 : =

ṅkuṅṅkuṅ, adj. middle-sized, of middle height: § mo(ṅkuṅkuṅ

ṅkù’, adv. also: ṅkɑ̌’ṅkù’ yesterday, some past day ;
ni ṅkù’ yesterday; ni some days ago, recently;
ni mǒ’ ṅkù’ the day before yesterday; ni be’ the
other day, some time ago.

ṅkù’ , n. (ma) remains, rubbish, litter, debris, remnants;
ṅkùǐ’dzubàṅ remmnants of batata; ṅkǐ’ kědzṳ crumbs, or
remmnants of food; ko’ mbiyaṅ remmnants of groundnuts;
ṅǩ’ ṅgo̤̍ṅ bread crumbs or stiff maize pap; ṅkwin
chips or splinters of firewood.

ṅku’, n. shrub. muscus juice, resulting from cooking stalks,
used to prepare pap of Indian corn

ṅkù’mù̯, n. congregation. community, meeting, assembly, convention,
union, etcs ṡkǐ’mṳ̍ bùn kristo church of christ:

ṅku’ mu̯mbàṅ, n. pl. ku’ b̯mbàṅ widower. called so only as long
as the mourning festivities have not yet been completed;
mǒ’ ṅku’ mu̯mbàṅ kà kwi’ ntsù i boà tù i me’ ni ta’ lùm
a certain widower did not shave or cut his hair for one
year (a year of mourning): § tsǒ̌d tuvu, kom tuvu, vu,
fòṅni

ṅku’mùṅg wi, pl. ku’ bùwi (ku’ bṳ̯̀ṅgwi) widow;
mǎ’ ṅku’ mo̤̍ṅgwi mà’ ndzi. i fufu, kě, i sisi ni ta’ lùm,
ku̯̍ mṳ̍ nsu’ mbùm ni ndo̤ s bo̤ a certain widow dresses
in white or black for one year and even neglects to wash
her body.

ṅkù’nìmu’, n. also: lawuma or làγuma tinder (from the oilpalm)
ṅkṳ̍̀, nu. hundred; ṅko̤̍ ikwaà ni tedṅgam four hundred and thirty

ṅkù, n. string, yarn, thread, rope, line, ribbon, band;
strong rope to tie slaves or other captives;
ṅk̤lampùd wick; tongue:;
ṅkṳ̌màsin sewing machine thread, sewing cotton;
a string of eggs, tied in a banana leaf;
ṅkṳ̌motoòṅ windpipe, breathing tube; baldric
(for man carrying a sword); thread, cotton, yarn;
ṅ“ǩ̤nd̤’ď̤’ rope made of liana; intestine;
ṅǩ̤ntsďńàmbà n; bridle; ṅk̤sisi large nettle, used to
make ropes: navel string; chain;
wòm bowvcestring; ḟk̤ěvu judgment, sentence, verdict,
doom (the string bringing death): one of several male-
factors may say to his companion: ’a mà mbo̤ ṅk̤ěvu b
ta’ ńin e?’ do we not have the same fate? § azuùnti.
dzwen. ba’. sab. d̤’. γaǎṅm mbobnṅkuṳ̤

ṅkṳ̌, n.
ṅko̤̍btu, n.

ṅku̯d, n.

ṅkṳ̀mtìso(fà

ṅkǔndab , n.

ṅkṳ̀ndòṅ, n.

ṅkùnduṳ̯̀ṅ, n.
ṅkṳ̌ndzù̯’, n.

ṅkṳ̍̇kṳṅ, n.

ṅkṳ̍ṅkṳ̀ṅ, n.

ṅko̤̍’ku̯’, adj.

s 32:

family, generation, tribe
intercessor, representative, compensation, substitute

click (formed on the hard palate, sign of contempt) ;
i ta̤m ṅ“kṳ̯d be clicks (to express his contempt); § mfid

), n. also: helve of a hoe; mu̍ṅg wi le sa̤̯m
ṅ’k̤̍mtiso ni bà i, ni mfà’ the woman holds the helve
of the hoe and is working.

generation, family, relation, kindred; § ṅk̤ěbùn,
ṅǩ̤ndzṳ’, ndzṳṳ’

plantain; lipo̤’ banana, eaten raw; ṅk̤̍ndòṅ
kind of banana; ṡko̤ńdoṅ ṅgomni decorative
banana (musa religiosa, it grows in the bush and
only monkeys eat it); § esu’ ṅko̤̍ndon,
ntǒṅk̤̍ndoòṅ,

wooden drum to call people or to send messages; §
family, kindred, relation; § ṡk̤̍mdab, ṅk̤ěbùn, ndzuṳ̯’, ṅk̤

also: ṅkṅk̀̇ shrub (the single stems are used for
hedges, because they take root easily); used as “flag

of truce” (by twin mothers); sign of twin mothers;

the leaves of the bush have white stripes; if such leaves
are put by the door of a house, everyone knows that the
mother of that house has given birth to twins;

ṅkomnsi ni nsa̯m n; bò i, ni ndzid mǧ̯ mà
na’ti ṅgâ. i bo̤ ṅkom-ńikòb a paralytic person holds a
stem of this shrub in his or her hand and walks around
with it to show that he or she is a councillor of god.
Some women go to the bush for three or four days or
even a week without eating anything. They then return
to the house and start practising as native doctors or
some kind of soothsayers; this signifies that they have
received some insight into the healing effect of plants ;
§ ḋgo̤làṅ

also: ṅkùṅṅko̤̍ṅ sloping ground; vṡko̤ṅko̤̍ṅ mbad precipice
steep slope; ntsi banck of river or stream.

’

bent, not upright, not straight, burdened;
i ti’ nesi bo̤ ṅko̤’ku̯ , kṳ̍ tsi ntsinika̯̤ d bo be sits
there rather crooked, not straight, not upright ;
mo’ m̀ṅgwi kà Ǐ’ dzṳm mon, titi ṅu swibo, ndzi vi
a pregnant woman is burdened nine months, before she

 

 

go; =

gives birth.
ṅkwàb , n. calabash with large opening
ṅkwabàm, n. large bag of soft material, with double handle
ṅkwâkwa, adj. scraped off; § kwǎ
ṅkwàkwǎ, adj. level, horizontal

ṅkwalà’, n. thing without head; ked arrow shaft without
head; senseless speech or riddle; therefore: ṅkwalà’ e?
(question to start a story or a riddle with) may I start?
answer: e, ṙkwa’ go on

ṅkwali, n. formation of small mounds around the maize plants

ṅkwàn, n. pl. kwàn slave; ba̤d prisoner of war;
ṅkwàn kěmvi ò bondage of the elements of this world;
ṅkwǎn Mbù’ndàm slave from the Tchang area; ṡk wan
Moòm slave from Bamum; rṡkwan mu̍ṅgwi female slave;
§ es’, ṅgàṅ-tsaṅ

ṅkwànkw=ǎn, n. cloth worn between legs and fastened onto the
girdle; ndzi ṅk wànkwan small loincloth for men, worn
as mentioned above.

ṅkwàṅka̤d, adj. sour, too strong (of old wine)

ṅkwàssù’, n. arrow, ked; ked bo̤ mbom iteèd; ľ̇ = mà nmngynṅ
tù i le there are three kinds of arrows; is the
head of the shaft where the arrow point is fixed;
1) yoli = ked yi bo ldṅ mon ta’ ńin a oli is an
arrow with one barb;
2) màmban = ked, yi bo bon bi iba a Mamban
ìs an arrow with two barbs;
3) ṅkwaàsoù’ = ked yi bo lṅ boòn bi ited a Nkwasu’ is
an arrow with three barbs .

ṅkwatiìkwati, adj. scraped, shaved; § kwacti
ṅkwǎvaṅ, n. (ma) top end of a raffia rib

ṅkwà’, n. (ma) upper part of human body, between loins and
shoulder; § ko̤n

ṅkwa’lan, n. also: ṅkwa’ laṅ gravel; aṅ-kun temporary bed,
consisting of a row of raffia ribs, laid on the floor
to sleep on; § (libà-ṅkwa laṅ , ṅwa’laṅ

ṅk w̯d, n.

ṅkwad, n.

ṅk ẁ̤n, n.

= 1: -

piece of land lying fallow

heap, multitude of, pile of, great deal of;

ṅkwa̤d bumu’ heap of ashes; ṅkwa̤ d bùn lot of people;
ṅkwa̤dkòb abusive word for people, staying abroad for
too long, as if they had forgotten their homeland;
ṅkwa̤_dmvà’ pile of rubbish, refuse;

ṅkwa̤d-ṅàlǐ’ṅkwin heap of brush wood, pile of copse-
wood; v̇k wa̤dṅkwin pile of firewood;

ṅkwa̤d-yǎṅ-dzaṅ a lot of sick people; § ndai, mbuṅ

(a-ma) back, reverse, ridge ;

pǎd mon ni ṅkwa̤̍n put the child on your back;

m’ γo̤ ni; ṅkẁ̤n i e? has he a calabash on his back
(because you avoid beating him, though he was behaving
very badly); ṅkwa̤̍nbo pl. ̇kw̤̌hmbo (a-ma) back of the
hand; (̇kwa̤̍nkù pl. ṅkwo̤̍nṅkù (a-ma) instep;

ṅkwo̤̍m mommoòm bare or uncovered back;
ṅkwǎ̤nnàmmfòn back of the chief’s horse.

ṅkẁ̤ntika̤̯d, adj. stunted in growth; mù ṅkwà̤ntika̯d small person,

for some reason or another stunted in growth; § kwan;
another meaning: not well done: ù kǎ mà nan kědzy le
mbàṅka̤d bo̤ì, ù kà naṅ, à bi bo̤ ṅk ẁ̤ntika̯d you did not
cook the food well; you only half cooked it.

ṅk wmbṳ̀ṅ, n. time when the rains return (February - March)

ṅk wendàò ,

n. pl. bàṅk wendàò’ carved figures, symbols of reprentatives

of spirits; bimo’ bùn ni ṅgomti bàṅkwendo’ ma ndab, ni
nnuy̯ṅ kědzuṳ ni; ntsù i mbo̤ ndù’ s“ some people honour
these symbols in their house and put food and also
pour some wine into their mouth: bimo’ bùn ni ntsi’
ṅkwendo’ matso̤̍ṅni tṳ̯, ni mfa kěǎdzṳ mb i; ṅǧ̤̤̇ṅgàṅ,
bi sisi, to, ndzuṳṳ; bùn suṅ ṅgâ, ńiìkòb dzṳ mu le,
bo bàti ṅgâ, ńnkòb le to y nù mboṅka̤d mb bo

some people place the carved symbol under a tree and
offer it food; the black ants come and eat the food;
the people then say, ’’God has eaten it’ and they think
that god will do them a favour.

ifferent kinds of ants: ṡǧ̤ṅgàṅ black ants; ndza̤d
wandering ants; bo ni w; bab boà bon they care
for the female ones and for the young ones; nsyṅgo
white ants; mbinmoin small ants on trees, biting wildly.

ṅk wâṅgwa̤n, n. time of returning from the farm, about five o’clock

p.m.

ṅk wèṅkwè, n. also: ṅkwirṅkwì greatness of, largeness ;

 

 

=3g(1:-

ṅkwerṅkweè ndab a very big house, palace;
ṅkwiṅkwi mùn a giant.

ṅkwin, n. (a-ma) firewood; ṡkwin ṅko̤̍bṅko̤b also: - ṅko̤bti’ko̤bti
chopped firewood; rikwin le ko̤bti split firewood.

ṅkwǒ̤̇kwo̤, adj. small, tiny, little; ndí ṅ“kwǒ̤ìkwo̤̤ small hut
ṅṅad, n. winding, screw, worm

ṅṅomṅom, adj. bent, wry, askew; §

ṅṅodṅd , adj. bent, askew, curved

adj. dry, arid; mfoṅ thin cow

ṅṅudṅṳd, adj. forced, enforced

ṅṅwiìnika̤d, adj. sparkling, glittering, glistening, beautiful;
ndzi ṅṅwinika̯d festive garment; k (̇winika̤d
glittering things.

ṅom, n. young raffia stalk, split and bent twice into an oblong
shape, used as a rake to move loose rubbish or soail,
but with two handles and without teeth.

ṅom, v. bend, curve; yoò màùn le ni ndzid bo̤ ṅomṅom this man is
walking bent forward; màndzi le nom mṳ̍ this road is
curving; § ṡṅomṅom

ṅǎd, n. tail-feather; tail-feather of a cock

ṅ̤̌’, v. pinch, nip, wink; i i ni m’ she winked with her eyes;
nsoòdṅ show teeth; n’dǒ’ nsuṅ mbò i (̇gâ, ndzi ni ndzaṅ
a, lâ i nsàòṅ mi, ni ṅgo̤̍, k̤̍ bàti yǎ ň ndzi le bo̤
I told him that I am hungry, but he showed his teeth,
laughing and not thinking of my hunger;
m̌’ mùn tǎ’ mà ko̤ fà’ mbò ba Vohanne; Sam bi’ni mà iṅǎ’
ba ohanne ni mi’ ṅgâ, i ma mfa fà’ le mbò le bo̤
someone wants to get work from father ohn; Samuel
started to wink at john with his eyes, hinting that he
should not give work to that man;
ndzo̤’ mon tsà̯m mon titi, ṅkan, mbi’ni mà mon i̇gâ,
i sa’ni ni Ii, ṅgâ, nǎ i ko̤ i, mfa buṳn mbò i
the maid carried the child and grew tired and began
pinching the child so that it would wake up and cty,
in order that its mother would take it and suckle it.

ṅù’, interj.

ṅo’mu, v.
ṅo’ni, v.

ṅo’ni, v.

ṅoṅkwà̯n, n. hump-back (scoffing word)

ṅò’ti. v.
ṅù’ti, v.

v.

ṅu, n.

The names of the months in Mu̯bako’ and in Muṅgaka:
Tsu Ba’ni Mu̯bako’

january
February
March
pril
May
une
july
ugust.

September
october
November
ecember

ṅu’, v.

- 36 -
once more; bim (̇d’ say it again (and I will flog you);
bim (̇d’ ṅgâ, u mà ni nto yo na e; 1â u to yo̤ a, my to
fàb u confirm again that you will not see me; but if
you do see me I uill flog you.

bend, bow down, be eskew
contempt, be contemptable

gnaw off, loosen with effort, envy, babble

pinch, nip
nod, beckon; i ̇̍d’ti ni bo he beckoned with his hand; § kab
be curved, bent, crooked

month, moon, menses; ni nta the moon shines;

ṅu sàṅṳ̯ mvi the moon is shining (the whole nigpht) ;
ṅu so’ mu̯̤̍ the moon has risen (when rising in the
night); tum the moon is rising (at day-time)

ṅu lum full moon; ru ku mauǎ̯̍ the moon died’, it
waned completely; ṅu bǒ̤ ṅku ited. i to bo̤̍ni
(someone who has gone on a journey) will return after
three months; bo kà vi u ni nts̯ṅṅu e? were you born
at the time of full moon (and therefore as proud as
that moon)? ṅu dza’̯ mṳ̍ ni the menses passed her,
(did not return owing to pregnancy); ̇u mbuṳka̯d first
month of pregnancy.

Tsu Ba’ni Muṅgaka

sòdja lùm mfi;
soòdyṅa koòṅ, ṅu bd, ṅu kǎ fà’ month of spear, war;
sà wàsòa ṅt mà tǎ mon month of begetting;
sònia ṅu ṅg’ṳ̯ month of planting. sowing;
sòdlaba ṅu mu’ ṅgo̤̤ ma ṅgwa̤n going to farm;
sògbodebà ṅu fà’ month of work on the farm;
sòasilebà ṅu wom fà’ ni so farm-bed-making;
sdòdsàg bùṅbà ṅu kwǎli ṅg wàfṳd heaping up soil
around maize plants;
gbànsòa ba̤n, m’ mbom kà̤ntik̤̀nti (dance) ;
Vomsòa ṅu voma-(ń̤ṅ ba̤n month of dance;
sòsàwasibà ṅ t’ ṅkwin lela, mà nan ṅkaṅ (beer) ;
lesa ṅt lea feast of reconciliation.

raise shoulders, oppose, resist, rebel, put on airs, warp ;
a ṅu’ it warps; § (ṅu’si, ṅu’̤, ṅuti;

 

 

ṅu’si, v.
ṅu’ti, v.
ṅu’ù̯, v.
ṅud, v.

ṅuni, v.
ṅṳni, n.
ṅunni, v.
ṅṳti, v.

ṅu’, v.

ṅvvǎd, v.

3 =

be proud, impudent, insolent, daring;
i ṅu’si mbùm i he is impudent, puffs himself up;
§ ṅaṅsi, ṅa’mṳ̍, sàti

form an arch, vault, be vaulted;; § ṡ̍u’
puff up, blow up,; § ru’

clinch, press, urge, persuade, shove, push; embrace,
stiffen, be unyielding, be zealous for, constrain;

ù ṅṳd màn ṅgâ, i y nù ni kwammi’ you force the man
to do things against his better insight; où ṅṳd nd mṳ
you are compelling me; ncsi ṅ’d mu̯̤̍ the water became
hard, froze; i ṅṳd ndoo̤ he makes an effort to run fast;
ṅ’ṅud i ni t̤̍n I urged him strongly; ṅgo̤̍ṅ le ṅṳd mṳ
the maize pap stiffend; § ky;

squat (on the heels), cower, crouch with hands resting
on backs of heels

sugar-cane; ntgà̤̍ a dzum ti, mu ni nta’ mà k wad ṅṳni
I am thirsty, I want to chew sugar cane.

be unyielding, zealous for ;
i ṅṅunni ni fà’ le, mbi’ ndib ni nda a he puts effort
into that work, because time is passing.

become stiff, hard; ma (ì̇uṳti ny feet are sleeping;
bo i mu̯̤̍ his hand is cramped; tsaṅ ṅ̍pṳti i, à wě
bo ke ku sě the cramp made it stiff, it attacked hand
and foot.

carry a heavy load, bent under heavy load
also: ṅwvěd draw (only small quantity) ;

ti ṅwad i bo̤ ni fṳ̯ko̤b sisà enjoy him but with a long-
hand spoon = keep away from him.

ṅwad fńìkòb, n. sign of god, the light-coloured stripes on the

ṅwan, n.

ṅwana

ṅwàṅ, adj.

thighs or on the belly indicate pregnancy.

soot; rṅwan sa̤n mè soot is very black.

real name of the circumcisor’s son;

ṅgàṅ-vòma circumcisor; when a child is born during
Voma, it is given the name riwamna and becomes a

member of the Voma society.

terrible, dreadful, very; mbo§̤ṅ kwǒ̤d mè (̇wànṅṅwàṅ

ṅwaṙ, v.

ṅ wàṅti, v.

ṅwà’, n.

ṅwwà’, adj.

ṅwǎ’, v.

ṅwa’laṅ, n.
ṅwwà’ndikàn,

ṅwà’ni, n.

- os -
the thunder is rolling dreadfully.

crack; mbàṅ le ni ntswě, mbi’ à (ṅwavṅ a teoe pot is
leaking, because it is cracked.

flash, lighten; fxṅmbo̤ṅ ṅwaàvṅti it lightens

colour, paint; the black-white striped spines of the
hedgehog

striped, signed; ndzi ṅwà’ striped clothes

produce colour, provide with colour, make something:

’glitter or sparkdle; fig. cast an eye on; bi ṡṅwa’ mi’ min

ni; kě be watch these goods carefully.
fine sand; § laṅ, sansân
n. rammer, ramrod (for muzzle loader)

book, letter, scripture, writing;

ṅwà ni-ko̤-ṅkab receipt; ṙwà ’ni-ṅgoòṅ map;

ṅwà ni-sani-ndàm letter of divorce; ṅwa ni-lùṅ
book of life; ṅwa’ni-ntum letter to be sent off;
§ ni, bu ’ṅwaà’ni

ṅwwà’ṅwà’, adj. striped, designed

ṅwà’ti, v.

ṅvěd, v.
ṅwid, v.
ṅwini, v.
ṅ winiṅwini ,
ṅwitso’, n.

ṅwòd, n.

lighten, flash, (flash of mirror, etc.) ;

mǎ’ yum ndankgad i ṅgṳ̯ wo̤’ ni nswǐ lò’ kṳ̯nindn,

ṅṅwà’ti ni mi’ ma suddenly a brilliant light from
heaven flashed into my eyes; ri̇wà’ti mu’ keep a torch
burning by waving it.

also: ṅwǎd or: ṅwèdti or: ṅwèti take off small quantity ;
i ṅwti ndibà’ he takes off a small bit of tobacco;

bi ṅweti nto be careful with the soup.

spit, expectorate; § nti

glitter, be bright, please; k ṅwini mi’ glittering things
adj. shining, bright, luminous

(Moghamo dialect), Bali: dzi tso̤’ (some) bitter grass sp.

long feather of the cock

 

 

z

bon

pc

f

ńâàbli, v.

ńâad, n.

s

boast of, please oneself, be proud of; despise ;

i ni ńńa vu ceath is nothing to him; i (sl ṡkàb i

he boasts of his money; i ńǎ mùbàṅ he trusts the
white man; i ń’ǐ wi bi ndzamṳ̯ be is proud of his
great number of women; nctsintà̯d ni ńńa mfòn the
servant of the chief is arrogant, because he thinks the
chief will back him; §

muddy, be muddy, stir up, make a thin pap, mixing a
fluid containing ingredients by stirring with a ladle;
ntsi bo̤ ńǎb mo̤̍, the water has been stirred and is
no longer clean; boòm a ni (ńńab nǎ̇b madzi my stomach
is stirred up; où ńǎb kèdzy ti you take a little from
different kinds of food and mix them up without con-
suming them entirely = you gormandize.

meddle with, interfere unduly, confuse ;

ù ti ńńàbli a mè, mbi’ko e? why do you interfere in

my matters? o ti’ ńńàbli ṅgàm, mbi’ko̤ e?’ why can you
not stop talking, until we have finished our conversation?
à ńàbli it is confused; mon o ni ńńabli ti this
child talks a lot of nonsense.

buffalo; mb̌ṅ ńad herd of buffaloes; ńad kà sǎb ba m,

bàùn tam i ni ndikàṅ, a buffalo stabbed my father;
people shot it with a gun and killed it.

kind of dance

bàń̇ìm animal; ńàmbà ni horse; ńàmbà ni fufu a white
horse; ńàmbà’ni, à bǎṅ mè bùṅ a. red horse;

sisi black horse; ńàmbà’ni fù’nifu’nì livid

horse; ńàm kwaàṅkù quadruped; earthworm;

nàùm ma lum game, driven into the grass during the
hunting season; ńàm game, small game; wild beasts;
ńàm mbibi beast; cunning fellow, were- beast.;
ńàmndòn cucrsed animal; ńàmmndòn kà tum ma (kà’, ;
n’tam ni. ndikàṅ, ńńd’ the cursed animal ran out of the
bush, I shot it with my gun and killed it, (but when
recognized as such, it will not be killed, but left alone)
nàmnduṅ small kind of cat; ńàmmntsa’ flesh made of
’earth’’ to express human fèPfailness; mo̤̍ ni ṅko̤̍ àmntsa’
I am nourishing my earthly body, (sometimes said, when
going to eat or drink ); ńàmntsi cow; ńàmtsa̯mkěǎ
pack-animal; ńammmfòn the king’s section of the game-bag.

= so; =

ńàm, n. flesh

ńam, v. trickle through; ntsi ni ńńam water is trickling through.
ńâǎm, v. be avaricious, be stingy; § kabti

ńǎm, v. also: ńâìmti mix up; § ńamńǎm

niàma proper name of male person

ńama, n. copbper, ore, metal, bronze; § kan; ńama

ńama, n. knife with an iron handle

ṅùàm mbùm, n. flesh of man, natural kind of man

ṅàmuṅgùb, n. food (black stuff, potable, found in the Bali market)

ṅùmṅgwì, n. kind of grass with oily leaves, the roots of which
taste similar to meat

ńamńǎm, adj. mixed up, confused; §

x

ńùàmti, v. mix up, falsify; § sńńàmńǎm

ńàni, v. irritate, provoke; ma (fńńàni nd mṳ̌ bo̤ do not provoke
me up to the point of anger; do not play with me.

ṅâùmti, v. intermingle, be intermingled; vi ndzamgy ni bàkèni
amongst a lot of children rovers are also intermingled,
(not all children of a family are alike) .

ńàṅ, n. rust, corrosion; ńàṅ wě wobti a rust has affected my
fingerring; ńàṅ kwa̤d mṳ̍ bin rust has devoured your
goods.
;
ńaṅ, v. change, become uneasy, become difficult ;

à ńaṅ mu̍ = nù le it became hard to sustain;
ṅwà’ni ńaṅ mṳ̍ ndiò ti it was very hard in school
today; dzu’ ńaṅ mg̯̤̍ the yam cannot be boiled.

ńaṅ, v. turn up (the nose at someone) ;
i ńaṅ tsen he knits the brow; § ned, ńaṅti

̇aṅgì, n. person from the country inhabited by the Bańaṅgiì, in
Mamdfe and its neighbourhood

ńaṅti, v. shun, loathe, disgust, abstain, detest; carry on the head;
ti ńńaṅti kěǎ-ṅwini-mi’ avoid the glittering things; § nad

 

 

ńaṅtika̤d., adj. terrible, dreadful, awful, loathsome; ù bǒ̤ ti mà nsu’

ńeblì, v.

mbùm ù mbàṅka̤d bo̤, ù bo̤ yum ń̇ńaṅtika̤d you are loath-
some, if you do not wash yourself properly.

do s.th. very cautiously; i we yum bo̤ ńàṅ̤ ńàṅuṳ

he seizes the thing but with his fingertips (so that
he does not burn his fingers) ;

ńńaṅṳ nsiṅkù ma ( am standing on tiptoes.

garden egg (solanum esculentum); § yan

creep, move timidly, spy-scout; become, start slowly,
sneak; ni ńńa’ mbi tohae leopard sneaks around the
goats; à ńa’ ni mbod ndiò miyà it became
better today; ńa’ mpà’ti nno start drinking a bit;

ńa’ ṅgù’li ù, ntsi fe’ be as still as a mouse and stand
over there; bo la’ ńa’ tso madzo’ bin they will secretly
creep into your midst; bi’mo’ bùn ńa’ nfso madzo’ bo
certain people have slipped into our midst; mu la’ ńa’ to
ndzo̤̍ yan shall come as secretly as a thief; § dzwě

act carefully, do slowly;

ma mon ni (ńńa’mṳ̯ mon ma kù i the mother cautiously
keeps her child on its feet (that it may not fall) ;

i nu̯ṅ i ni; fà’ i bo̤ ńa’mù ńa’m’̯ hae is doing his work
only half-heartedly.

Pa

spoil badly; à ou’, ńńà’ni it is bad and spoiled.
a low-growing thorny shrub (almost like a garden-egg)

do s.th. secretly; i kà ńa’ti, nto, nti’ yṳ̯’ ma l’ le
he came secretly and met us in that place.

walk carefull y
be avaricious, be covetous; § ṅgàṅ-ńǎ m, kà̤bti
be sparing of; mon, i m’ ṅgo̤̍ṅ, ńńammni a, la’ ko̤ sǎ kě
ńamni he who sows sparingly, will reap sparingly;
§ ṅgaàṅ-ńa mni
give grudgingly, give scarcely
roll up, cower, crouch;

mbiyaṅ ńebli teohe leaves of the groundnut are
rolled up (a sign of some disease) .

ńed, v.

ńenti, v.

332

(used in negative phrases only), esteem, value, honour,
obey; i mà (ńńed ba i bo̤ be coes not obey his father;
i mà ńńed màùn le ni nù bo̤ be coes not respect that
person in anything;

i ned ṅkò̌ṅdzi’ he throws up his nose (at s.o.); § ońaṅ

gnash (cteeth), grind; i ńen nsòṅ mi mb i he shows
teeth at him (in despise) .

pull, tear of; mà ni ńńenti ṅgwàfṳd bo̤ the
grown man does not pull off the leaves of an Indian
corn which is still growing (as children sometimes do,
because he has learned to wait).

ńèṅńèṅńèṅ, onom. as ced as fire; v̇gǒ̤’mu’ bǎṅ mè (ńàṅńàṅńàṅ the

glowing coal is red-hot.

ńiìkòb, n. pl. bàńikòb spirit of the forest, mbom (kind) of human

ńin, nu.

ńinsi, n.

being or principle of human beings or nature;

bàGrikia kǎ mfuṅ mfò bàńikòb bab ṅgâ, eus the Greeks
used to call their chief deity eus’,

jùju mà mbo ńiìkòb bo̤, à bo̤ kùm a juju or a fetish is
not a god or divinity; once a year there is a day of Voma
or ntsu’ kùm Voma; y ńikòb bo̤ mfo̤nika̤̯d = yǎ mbom

bo̤ mfo̤nika̯d ny nature is a gentle one; the “spirit”

or principle inspiring me, is of a gentle kind;

§ n baṅikob

the God of the Noly Scriptures; boni the God of
peace; ikoòb Ntsàmvi the highest God

become damp, melt, dissolve; sugar ńṅn ni ntsi sugar
dissolves in water; ndzi ń̇n the cloth became damp.

one; bo ti’ ntu’ ńin, ni nno, ni ṅkooni they made
friends again by drinking from one cup;

bo kà bo ni nù ńin they had joined work;

nù mbuyṳ̯ka̯d kṳ̯ mbo̤ ntsu’mvi ńin the vwrong uill last
but one day = you are to wait for a short time only
and then you will see, how everything will turn out
good in the end.

the god of the earth

adj. mixed, amongst; § ńàmti, ńǎm

adj. careful, ready to run off, cautious ;

tsi bi i ńńaṅṳ̍ńaṅṳ, be watchful towards him;
tsi the bird sits ready to fly off.

 

 

= 1s::
ńńa’tińa’ti, adj. secret; § ni ntsa̤m

ńńǎ̌’mùn, n. pl. ńń’ǎ’bun maurderer

ńń̤̌ also: fńń̤ ṅàm-ndza’mvṳ someone working ac-
cording to his own will, not keeping to an order or a
fixed rule, lit. hunting game and passing the dog’s
kennel, thinking that you can run faster than the dog;
ù ni mbùm u you deceive yourself.

ńo, n. snake; ńokwaṅkà’ also: kwaâṅkà’; ńombàm also: mbàm
black, poisonous snake as thick as an arm;
ńonindo̤ṅ small serpent, head and tail seem to have
the same shape, therefore thought to be without a
mouth, regarded as a divinity; if a woman finds such
a reptile, she is very pleased, covers it with soil and
says Now will I have a child’; § ṡgo̍ńo, tsěnńo

ńnǎd, v. dip into, immerse, baptize

ńoli, v. look at, observe, watch, view; § kiti

ńǎ̌mńâm , n. worm; S cid

nòd, n. the foremost point, tip, top, gable-end; trunk (elephandt) ;
ńddtu highest point of the head; top of

the mountain or hill; ńoandab gable-end;
ńòd-tu-nda-k̤̍ti-Ṅkòb top of the temple roof.

fen
io

ṅ, emph. particle only, surely; mà ndnh ńdṅ ba bo̤ I do not
know anything; vṅ’kà yo ńdṅ ba mfòn I have seen the
king myself, no doubt; à ci vo̤ ńdṅ bi boo̤ it will never
be lost at all.

ńoṅ, n. leech, sucker, cupping glass or horn

ńoṅ, v. suckle, kiss; § v̇oṅdù, ṅgàṅ-ńoṅ-bu̯n; ńo’ti mon

n. bee; (íǎṅdù ta m(̤̍ na a bee has stung me; § dàù, ńòṅ

oṅgbà’a, n. person from the country where the Bali migrated from

ńonṅti, v. lick off, suck off

ńùṅṳ, v. investigate, search, penetrate;

mbi mǎ’ mùn kà vo, i tum bàn bi ṅgâ, bo yo, (ńńdṅṳ

ma m̌’ ľ̤’ somebody’s goat got lost; he sent his
people to look in another place.

=
ńù’, n. excrement, mucus of the nose

ńn’, n. pus, suppuration, purulence; fso mg̯̍ the wound
became punrulent.

v. kill, murder; dissolve (a drinking society)

ńg’mu̯, v. bend, curve

ńo’mu̯, v. approach, come near, be near to;
bo mu̯̍ mà γǒ̤ ntse wu’ they have nearly reached
there; à ni ńńo’m’̯ mà yγǒ̤ wu’ tee time is near to go

there; i ni ńńo’mṳ̯ mà ts wu’ he umill just arrive there.

kill one another

)
lo;
g
F:
g

fo
lo

ṅgù̍ṅ, n. also: hair, growing from millet (andropogum
sorghum) , stings the human skin; chafěf;
mbouṅvo̤’timbob, ni nsu’ ń̌ ṅgo̤̍ṅ sě, ale bo fuṅ i s6ǎ ni
m bṳ̍ṅsǐ’ńǐ ṅgo̤̍ṅ the first heavy rain, which washes off
. the dust., also washes off the fine hair from the millet
and is therefore also called ’’washer off of the millet hair’.

ńù’ti, v. kill (many or often)
ńn’ti, v. suckle a child; § bam, ńoṅti, ńoṅ
ńùm, n. sun, hour; ńùdm tum ma mbad telae sun appears;

ńùm ko’ the sun rises; ńùm tam nd̤ṅ = ńùm koòṅ
it is noon; rùm co ̯ m̯̤̍ the sun is setting;

m fo̤ě̌d mṳ̯ teoae sun is becoming cooler’,

ùm bod = sw’ mṳ̯̤̍ the sun is becoming weaker;

ńùm tso teobae sun is setting; tcso̤’ the sun is shi-
ning very hot; ńùm between four and six
oclock a.m.; lit. the sun is like a young girl, not yet
hot or no longer strong;

ńùm (ṅg wěnṅg wèn time between sunrise and nine a.m.;
ńù̀m bonta time from noon to three p.m. ;

ńùm tsǒ̤dṅg̤̍ṅ harxmvest time;

ńùm sà’ni li time to wake up; § mbońùěm

ńùṅ, n. hair; ńùṅtu hair of the head; moss on tecrees;
ńùṅntsù beard, mustache; Foṅùṅntsù king of beard
= ev. Ernst.

ńùṅ, v. be anxious, restless, excited ; ù ńùṅ mè, mbi’ko̤ e?

why are you so excited?

ńùṅndzu, n. female blossom of Indian corn, esp. it’s long hair

 

ńuṅni, v.

=

 

also: fṅuṅni be restless, excited; i ńuṅ̍ni mà γ̤̌ he
wants to go; tickle.

covered with hair

chaff

subdue, master, squeeze, knead, oppress;
bo ni ńńu’ mbàṅ they press the oilfruits; §
mbàṅ;

chaff; §

grind, pound; ;

m̌’ ṅguka̯̤d (ńì’ni ndibà’ ni bò i, nnyṅ madzi tsǒ̤ì-ndibà’
a grown-up ground tobacco leaves with his hand and
filled his pipe with it.

wrinkle, grind ;

md’ ṅgàṅ-yg-fù ńù’ti fù ni ṅgo̤, mfa mb mon, i ni
ndzaṅ a a naedicine-man ground herbs for medicine
and gave it to the sick child.

bring forth, produce, secrete; mba̤d evacuate faeces;
ńǐ̌ mbùm ay egss.

strive for, struggle for, endeavour to obtain;
i ni ńń̤ni wu’ hae strives to obtain a superior position.

dance, tread on, trample ;

ba̤n dance; bo nd ṅgònndam they dance the
bridal dance (on the wedding day) ;

ń̤ṅ ṅgu’ dance to glorify a hero; ntfsa’ stamp

on clay (preparing for brick-making or plastering walls);
tundzi mùn tread on the lappet of someone’s robe =
seduce his wife; ntǎṅkù mùn tread on the heels
of a man - seduce his wife; ńṳ̌ṅ (ti) ndž̤m mùn

tread close behind the foot of another man = seduce his
wife: i ntǐ̌ṅ-ndzi mf̤d ù hae took unfair advantage,
of your brother; ntsinta̤(d bo̤ nt’ yǐ wu’, mbo i fń̤ṅ (ti)
tu ndzi mfòn the king’s servant who strives to become
a big man, treads on the trail of the king’s garment;
ń̤̇ûṅ ba̤n bàsogè gymmastic-exercises.

v

spear grass; § ṅgodń

=2= 316 =

drive off, away; expel, make haste, hurry, run after;
mṳ̤̍ ṅg̤̀ le 1 have driven away the leopard;

i ń̤’ ndzà̤̯m wǐ ’ be strives for honour, vanity;

bo ndz̤̀n i they run after him;

bo ndzò̤m teoney drive away the dream;

m’ ṅgàṅ-yěǎ-fù lǐn mà (ń̤’ ndzò̤m some nmedicine-men
know how to drive away dreams; § ndzo̤m

be lame, paralytic

(thorny) tree sp.; the fruits of the tree grow in clusters;
spice; size: like small peas; inside: the red or green-
coloured skin is a second skin blended with white pulp;
the fruits are round and used as a spice for a strong
taste.

 

