 

o

= y

ò, yò, p. dem. teuhis one, these: (follows the noun; when

pab, onom.

pab, onom.

placed in front of it, thevariant yo i used),

ṅwà’ni o le this book; lynṅ d Ie = yo lyṅ le this name,
à mà mbo bub e, kě i̇gaṅ o ? is it not so, or is it?

§ bò, yò

very (white)

mbom mbàùm i bo̤ ndzo̤ fǎṅmbo̤ṅ, ndzi i fu’ mà pab his
appearance was l’ke lightning and his raiment as white
as snow.

hollow sounding, sound of emptiness;
mbiyaṅ tsu mè pab the groundnut sounds hollow
(because it is empty); § mpab

pǎd, v. put a load or a child on the back or on the shoulders;

pàdrṅk wn,

overthrow; fetch s.th. with hand or any long tool;

fṳ̀̍f̤d pǎd ndab the storm has knocked down the house;
ndzo̤’mon ni mpad mon the nurse throws’ the child on
her back; to, m’pad u come, I will put you on my back;
i pǎd ntsùndab he opens the door by moving the bolt
(refering to a sliding doovr);

mpàd ni ṅkù, ndǎ’ n’ mbo (Pr.) a pushing down with the
foot and a picking up with hands, (some method of
stealing); § pàti, pàdṅkw̤̌m, pàpa

n. knapsack, soldier’s or traveller’s bag, strapped
to the back and used to carry things of necessity;
§ bàm. pǎd

Paila quarter in Bali (named after the Bali-ku̯mbàd, where fierce

paliwà, n.

fighting once took place at that very place;
bǎ-Paila inhabitants of this quarter (near the chief’s
palace).

garment, consisting of a front and a back-sheet of cloth
(about two yds) with an opening for the head and sewn
together about three in. only, from both sides of the
loins; pali wà-ba̤d breast armour (made of leather or
other hard material)

pàpa, v.

papiìla, v.

pa’, v.

pà’sin

pà’ti, v.

pei, v.

pekub, n.

- 31 :-

cut off a piece or chip with a knife;
i pǎṅ tṳ̯ he chips from a tree.

carry a child on the back; § pǎd

deliberate, reflect, consider;

à bǒṅ ù to, bà papila ni yò nù you had better come
that we may consider the matter;

bo tsu nù ni ndo̤, kṳ̍ td mpapila bo̤ they speak about
the matter very quickly and without much consideration.

overthrow, beat off (dust from clothes); § pǎd

overflow, drink or eat a little;

ndù’ le lun titi, i pà’, ṅka d itis too full with wine,

it is overflowing and spilling on the ground;

à p’, ṅka̤d masi it is overflowing and spilling on the
ground; ntsi ṅgṳ̯ pa’, ntum ku̯mvi the river overflows
it’s banks’’ i ǎ’ mpǎ ntsù i ni mbǎ’mbà’ hae ate a little
bit in the morning.

spoil, become spoiled (of food) ;

à pa’ m(̯̤̍ it is spoiled; le mbo iìgo̤̍ṅ le pa’ mṳ̤̍
the meal and the bread is spoiled ;

but: ndù’ le tsǎṅ mu̯̤̍ the palmwine has gone bad ;;

§ esǎṅ

§ ndebnṅgon

pour away or in (small quantities) ;

pà’ti coffee le miyà, mbi’ ntù’ le lun titin a pour
away a bit of coffee, because the cup is too full.
flutter (of flag, etc.); pà’ti mi’ blink, wink;
pà’ti mu’ sway (with the torch-light to keep it
aflame); pà’ti saṅ, wag (the tail)

also: padpad (small dove-like) bird sp. (edible )
find out, question, examine;

i ni mpe nù ti he is examining things closely;

§ peti

(engl.) pay

raffia stalk with a plano-convex cross section, used as

 

 

Pen

pěna, n.
Pentekoste
peṅkà’, n.
pepà, n.
pepè, n.

pèti, v.

pe’li, v.

v.

pib, onom.

v.

v.

pidni, v.

pili, n.

=; =

a slide for the door; ̇̇ka ni nsan pèkùb, babtintsùndab
ni nda ni pèkùb on one side the raffia rib has a sort
of groove on which the door can slide; § la

proper name for girls; Penkwaṅa name of a girl

(tsu earthen vessel, flat basin
Pentecost

big hollow stalk, used as tube for enema

paper

swallow

question, search; mǎ’ mùn kà pèti moǎ’ nù, ndzu’, ṅǧ̤̌,
nsuṅ mbò bàwuka̯d someone researched a matter and
listened, he then went and told the grown-up men;

i peti ndib, sàṅ le kà tum a, mbò bo ba ascertained
from them the time of the star’s appearance;

§ mpetipèti, pě, somusi

working carefully; pe’li kùd careful work;
muṅgwi ò pelli mbùm ; this woman dresses herself up.

press in, break in, make a dent; ;

ma yò kaṅ bo̤ do not make a cent into this vessel;
i pǐ̌ my lo’ le, a ntswě he has dented the calabash, it
is leaking.

entirely, completely ;
à lun mè pib (aull to the rim.

a small piece, trifle matter; fa mb mg mo
give me a little bit.

take off a bit: pǐd mb miyà, mfa mṳ̯ break off a bit
for me.

reverse, turn or stretch out;

i pǐd ńàm bae stretches the animal (by slitting up the
body and stretching the limbs with small sticks, in order
to dry it); i pǐd mi’ mi he turns his eyes inside-out

(to frighten children).

assume a provoking attitude; § pini

kind of divination, some grass is rubbed between the

pulli’, n.

pim, onom.

pìn, n.

pin, n.

Pinyin, n.

pini, v. als

piti, u;

pitib-pitib

pi’, v.

pi’li, v.

- zo: -

flat hands; a sudden convulsion of the hands shows the
agreement to the action in question, therefore:

i fuṅ pili mbo he asks for an answer through this kind
of divination.

stalk from high grass, used by the youth for a wargame;
bo ni mm’ pili’ they throw the stalks like spears;
bo tam a ni they shoot me with such stalks.

(fall) noisily; à vǐ mè pim it fell with a bang.

tree (kigelia africana), fruit of this tree, about 12-1S in.
long and shaped like a hanging cucumber; it is often
used in magic, also as a medicine against rheumatism.

sickness, supposed to be caused by a magical use of
the fruit mentioned above; rupture of the scrotum,
inflammation of the testicles

proper name of a village about 12 km south of Bali.

o: pìdni assume a provoking attitude ;

i tsini mpidni pidni he assumed a challenging posture
(of the body).

cut into small pieces

adj. full up; à un mè pitib -pitib it is very full;
ṅgṳ̯m v’ mě pitibpitib locusts fell in swarms;
ṅgǒdmbṳ̀ṅ v mè pitibpitib hail fell in a great mass.

rub to powder, pulverize

tread, trample down, grind, squeeze, rub to powder ;

i 1̌’ ṅgwě bò a, mpili he seized my hand and squeezed
it; i Iǎ̌’ mpili mǎ’ he pulverized a leaf;

i mpili mǎ’ ṅgo̤ûṅ̤, à ti’ ṅkù’ mi hae took a loaf of
bread and crumbled it.

plànku̯tṳ , n. pl. dzabdzabtu (engl.) blanket, carpet with fringes;

pob. v.

pob, v.

prepare (the Lela-festival), start (the Lela);

mà pob lela = mà bu’ ṅkà, ni ntoṅ ndoṅ ni ńùm ited
ni; mfńùm to anmnounce the Lela, beat the drum and
blow the horn at 3 a.m.; § fa’

blind’ s.o. with magic, so that he cannot see what is
going on; bàyan kà to, mpob mǒ’ màùn ni fù, ndzǒ̤ kě bi
thieves came and blinded’’ someone with medicine and

 

 

= s -

then stole his goods;

mà pob catch a certain kind of bird with red
feathers that cries ko, ko, ko’ and give it to the chief;
you are then called a big man; ù bǒ̤ ṅgwěě ṅgu’
bo pob u f you catch that special bird, you will be
honoured.

n. flower, plant with a fleshy stem; spreads by exploding;
§ fu’

pom, n. (engl.) pump, syringe, irrigator with tube
poṅ, adv. still; à mè poṅ it is stockstill; § dzib
potsasia, n. time, about November-ecember

p̤̌, v. also: ptì brush fine; Nelen sǎd tù i mè, mpòo̤ti elen
combs her hair and brushes it finely.

po̤b, n. spot (on animals, etc.); mo6-lo’ kè mí-po̤b sisi mà mbo̤
nd i bo teohere is no defect or black spot on it.

po̤bfà’, n. small piece of (worked) soil; ṅ’ kǎ mfa’ fà’ i, mmà i
bo̤ moâ pb i have worked his garden and left a
small piece unworked.

po̤m, n. spot, blur, blot

po̤mp̀m, adj. spotted, stained: tṅgṳ̍nàm bo̤ pompo̤m kè po;bpob
a leopard is spotted .

po̤mtu, n. bald head

po̤po̤m, n. also: p̯̀p̀m teree sp. (kigelia aethiopica) with red
blossoms and fruits similar to pin, and also used in
the same way.

poti, n. also: pǒ̤ bristle (hair on the head) up

po̤’ti, v. form into loaves (pap of Indian corn); § so’ti

pub, adj. white (as snow): à fu’ mè pub it is as white as snow.

pùpòm, n. tree sp.: § po̤pom

