 

γèmti, v.

=ft -

help; § γèmti

γolo’mbam, n. kernel of the oil fruit; § wolo’mbàùṅ

γɑ̌ṅ, v.

γo, n.

also: wǒ̤ṅ or: γwǒ̤ṅ hire; § w̤̌ṅ

ladle (half of calabash = ba’ i lo’ drinking cup) ;

n’ to ln yγo̤ mbò ù = n’ to mà dzǎn mṳ̀ṅgwi mboò ù

I come, in order to woo a woman from you.

γo̤ = used as a respectful way of asking for a woman
to marry; i.e. ù bǒ̤ ndam mùṅgwi, i ṅgyemti u, ni mfa
kědzṳ̯ mbà ùà; yò tso̤̍ṅni nù, bo fuṅ mà lam mùṅg wi, ni;
mà lon γo̤ a when you marry a woman, she helps you
and serves you meals; this is the reason, why someone
who wants to martry, asks for a ladle.

mà dzǎn give a desired girl a chance to grow up.
§ yotsa̤ntsi, γotsà̤̀n

departure, the going;

ndib γ̤̌ y̤’ bi when the time of our departure
has come;

ndib yγǒ̤ à ńo’ muṳ̯ the time of my departure is near;
§ ntn’ γǒ̤kundzù’

go;

i kà yǒ̤ ma he went into the town;

bo sm bà ;. ṅgǒ̤ ni yi ma (̇goòṅ they hold his hand and
c n him into the town;

nota n ti tsi, ku̍ γǒ̤̌ yo f̤d ba bo I shall not rest, before
I have seen mna brothers;

bo y̤̌ gàb they go for circumcision;

bo yγǒ̤ vu they go to a funeral;

bo y̤̌ Iṳ̌ tuvo̤̍̌ they go to the place where the fare-well
ceremony for the dead is taking place;

i γ̤̌ nda mfòn be goes to work at the chief’s palace;

i γǒ̤ ndoṅ he goes to fetch or cut palmribs;

bo yγ̤̌ ṅkwin they go to get firewood;

bo yγň̤ vin they go to cut grass for the roof;

fy-

γo ni ba’ mn i concerning his son;
à yγǒ̤ ni ba’ k̤̍ki concerning the matter ofso and so.:

γǒ̤̌ (ṅǧ̤,, cj. marker to denote conditional clauses (very rare, placed

between tense marker and verb);

past: à I’ ni ṅgo̤ fǎn yò màùn le, lâ à kù’ mfǎn wàù bo̤

e? if that man had made the mistake (we could
understand), but that you have done it, how is that possible?
à Ǐb’ ni ṅgo̤, ńńǎd wàù (ńńd a ma ntsi it would have been
better, if you had baptized me.

 

 

= o: -
γo̤antsù, n. lower jaw; § γyàyà

γo̍γo̤’, n. center;
mà lǎm yum yo̤̍ro̤’ to split s.th. into two halves; ;
fo’ dzṳ̯ i he does not know what to do (he hesitates
between two opinions or possibilities) § à dzy a’;
ṅgodṅ bi sani γǒ̤’ at midnight; yγo̤yvo̤’ ̇goṅ midnight;
ù lin mà we (ńo yγo̤ěo̤’ e? () can you seize a snake in
the middle (of its body); in a case of strife: can
you judge without knowing the cause of the matter?
But: i to ma yo̤ěo’ ṅgoòṅ ba arrived at the center of
the village.

γ̌γ̤ màùn, n.pl. γṳ̌’ bùàn someone who does not belong somewhere;
ù bo̤ màùn, màùn ù ku̯̍ bo̤ you stand alone, you have
no one; § mf̤̍ṅnimùn, swǎmùn

γǒ̤oío̤’ ṅgòṅ, n. midnight; i co ni γǒûo̤’ṅgoòṅ ba arrived at midnight.

tu, n. fontanel, membranous space on infant’s head.

γ̌kad , v. go or fly uninterruptedly

γo̤lo̤ṅ, n. skaull bones ; γolo̤ṅ tu mùn skull bones of man;
mi’ mi ti’ mè γolo̤ṅ his eyes sunk into the sockets
(owing to thinness).

γo̤m, n. steep slope (impassable); § fen

γo̤mṳmbàm, n. small gourd bowl

γo̤ṅni, v. widen, be wide, hollow out, excavate;
l yo̤ṅni miyà there is some space;

i yo̤ṅni mo̤̍ ntsundab he videned the entrance.

γěo̤ts̤̀n, n. also: yγo̤b’š̤ntsi perforated bowl of a pumpkin for
the preparation of salt-lye ; § ro

γo̤tu, n. skull
γo̤tukù, n. pl. γo̤tuṅkù (ta-ma) knee-cap, knee-pan
γo̤’, n. pl. ṅgu’ (ta-ma) cheek ; vg’ ta i lum my right cheek

γuṳ̯̀̀’ ; n: envy, greed; i kà tam yo’ ni kě6 mfa̤d i hae is envious
of his brother’s goods; § muṳ̯yn§̌’

γ̌ v envy, be envious ; i γo̤ mfa̤d ni kě ba i he envies his
brother for the goods inherited from his father.

 

S
γuň̤=, v. glow; § v̇gǒ̤’ mu’

γoň̤û’ v be envious of;

ù ni ṅgǒ̤’̌ toòṅ ti you are very greedy; § toṅ, yo

 

γò̤’ ni, v. long for, strive for, be greedy; i ni ndzi mfi
she wants a new dress very badly; §

γòò’ tiγuò̤, n. epidemic parotitis, mumps
γù, p. indep. 2. sg. you; § wàù

γuùṳ̌bfù, n. a piece of a bamnanmna leaf
γubti, n. screen; § wauobti

v. stretch (forward) ;

bo ńfa’ ṅgùli yab, ntsi, ni ndzu’ti they approached,
stretched forward and listened.

 

γùmti, n. quadratic ’umbrella’ for men; § woàmcti

γù’ti, n. sliding door; § woà’ti

v. to line s.th. (on fringe), sew in; i γ̤̇ bàm be lined
the bag (to fasten the fringe); § wṅ

γu’, adv. there; § wu’

 

laughter; § sancti yṳ̍, to’ γo̤̍, mu’ y o̤̍
γṳ̌, v. laugh; bo kà y̤̍ i they laughed at him; § vyo̤ti (
γuṳ̯b, n. small bowl of pumpkin (cut into halves), only got

from o’
γu̯bti, n. flat bowl of pumpkin, used as lid ; it is a calabash j

cut into four part, one of these parts is a yyobti, one

half of the calabash is a yo’;

fa mùù n’ tu mu ṅgo̤̍ṅ ma tad give ne a flat bowl
that I may take the pap or fufu out of the pot;

fa mù̯ n’tu my ṅgo̤̍ṅ ma tad, nngyṅ ma yo, nso’ ci ṅgâ,
à teli give me a sherd of a calabash so that I can take
out the fufu from the pot and put it into a piece of a
calabash and shake it so that it becomes smooth; § fjgoṅ

 

-

γu̯btiṅgṳṅ, n. sherd, fragment of calabash to scrape the maize pot
or to take out a ball of cooked maize.

γud, v. hold with one’s arms, grasp, grip, hold fast;
i γd a ni t̤̍n he holds me fast.

γuu̯a, n. butterfly; γu̯ya ni ńńoṅ dù the butterfly sucks honey.

γù̯aṅ, n. okra;
bo w̤’ ti mpà ni yo̤̍γàṅ they make a mpa (during
cooking) tough with okra, (mpaà vegetable with black
berries).

γuù̀γṳ̀, adv. onom. fjiì;gṳm Iǎ mè r̤̍̍ the locusts pass rustling in
swarms;

γùṳ̀n, n. pl. bàvù̯γuǹ̤n fool, indecency ;
i kwà’ yγ̤̍ň̤6ṳ mùn hae is a real fool;
a v̤ǒ̤ěn nù itis foolish or a nù γo̤̍γṳn.
γṳ̌m, v. trouble, vex, torment, worry ;
bo ni mfed y’ bà’ bà’, k̯̍ lǐnh mà y̤̍m y bo̤
they exert pressure on us from all sides, but cannot
torment us to death.
γṳ̀mni, v. be mad, be crazy, be clumsy.

γ̤̀n, n. pl. of ṅgṳ̀n stranger, guest.

γ̤̌ṅgònndam, n. hilarious laughter when leading the bride home;

§ ts̤d
γu̯̍ti, v. laugh in a friendly manner; § y
v: surround, border

γu̯’ nù, n. extraordinary’ matter;
ṅ’kà yγǒ̤ ma ntan, yṳ’ nu ti’ a I went to the market:;
something astonishing hapǒened; § dz̤̯̀muṳ

γu̯’ li, v. make dispairing effort (almost without success) ;
bo y’li ni fà’ they make great effort at work;
dzaṅ ni ṅgṳ̤’li a γṳ’li the disease is severely attacking
me; § kpdi, do̤’li

γu mu̯, v. surround, encompass, encircle;

yǎṅko̤̍bàn ni ṅgṳ̯’ mṳ̯ na haters surround me;

ro’ mu ľ̤’ ṅgo̤ ò, ntà̯m ńàùàm endcircle this grassfield
and shoot the animal.

 

 

=2(os =

γwǒ§ṅ, v. hire; § wǒûn

γwǎd, v. cut, slaughter; § wad
γwani, n. member of; § wani
γwaṅni, v. fight; § wavṅni

γwa’, v. throw off; § wa’
γwa’ti, n. rack; § wa’ti

γwe, v. catch; § w

jwey== u

ib; n. a of wood; § wib
γwòn, n. sickness; § woòn
γwom, nu. ten; § wom

γwomti, n. honour; § womti

v. hire, call; § woǎṅ

γwo’, v. swim; § wo’

γwo̍t̤la, n. lake; § wo̤to̤la
γwǒ̤hi, v. become § wǒ̤̤’ni

wùòṅ, v. enm, border; § w
γ

sl

hǎà, interj. do I know it; w ho knows;
mṳ̯ mà ndn ba bo̤ 1 co not know (shrugging
one’s shoulder):

haì, haì , interj. children chase the hawk with these shouts.

hě, also: ̤ or: wo̤e exclamation of astonishment

sedebo LN MM PL N

 

- 16 -

, p. rel., pl. bì pvbo, which; ;
yo ṅgwàfṳd bo̤ i mfòn this maize farm is the chief ’s ;
yò ndzi bo̤ i wo̤ e, ǎ i nǎ whose dress is that; it is
the one of Na; teso’ mbuyka d i; nswèàdka̤ d tum nd bùn
bad ulcers, terrible ones, appear on the people;
mon à, i mu̍ṅgwi ny child, a girl; § yi, bi

p. poss. 3. sg. cl. i his, her;
a mon i int is his child;
i mfa(d i he is his or her brother, sister.

mee

, p. . sg. (animate) he, she, it;
i kà dzun ndzi she bought a dress.

m-

’ p. obj. 3. sg. him, her, it;
bo kà we i ternaey seized him;
fa̤d bi bǎn i his brothers hate him.

i, p. poss. 3. sg. cl. 3 his, her;
i ba̤n bò i be broke his arm.

mat

, pref. nu. iba two; ifom eight; ikwà four.

iba , nu. two; iba two and two;
bo kǎ mm sil iba iba lùmlùm they paid each
two shillings (francs) yearly;
ku̯̍ mu ni ntsu tsu iba iba bo̤ without speaking with
two tongues, being double dealing.

ìbe’, p. dem., sg. that, there, over there;
be’ lṅ that chair; be’ ndzi that cloth;
bùn kà ňṅ ni be’ b ndza̤(n the people lived in
that area over there; bo ko’ nto ni ibo ṅgàb they
came again the other week; nù inbe’ bùn bṳ̤ ndzo̤ f̤d
bab sǎ the affair of those people is as bad as that
of their brothers; § bibe’

ìbò, p. poss. 1. pl. incl. ours (preceding the noun, often independent) ,;
bo kà mà mbo̤ kwaà’ ibò bùn bo̤ they had, in fact, not
been our people.

ìbàò, p. refl. 1. pl. incl. ourselves;
bà buyli iìbò we turn ourselves round.
bà I’ bo̤ mb we, ourselves are from God.

 

 

= 12: -

p. poss. indep. l. pl. incl. ours;
i ni mvo̤’ti fǎnnù b, kuṳ̯ muṳ̯ mvo̤’ ti bo ibɑ̌ṅgan mṳ̀mdin
b bo̤ ea erases our faults, but not only ours.

ifom, nu. eicght; lùm ifom eicght years ; ifomifòm eight at a time.
Ikom, n. town in Nigeria (trading center)

ikwà, nu. four; cy ikwà four trees; but: kwà tuṳ̯ four trees;
ikwaàikwaà four at a time.

ìla’ , p. interr., who, which;
bi kà y yò nàù le ni ila’ t̤̍n e?’ through what power
have you done this? § bia’

ìle’, p. dem. that; § bile’
intu’ , nu. six; intu’ intu’ by six , six at a time

ìsu̯’ , p. interr.. how many, what is (time and number);
mbo’ṅgo̤̍ṅ mb bin isṳγ’ e?’ how many loaves do
you have? mg nda’ ni fǎnnù bin ṅka isṳ̯’ e’ how many
times should I forgive you? à Iǎ ndi lùm is’ e ?
how many years have now gone by?

itàn, nu. five; itànitàn by fives, five at a time;
dù bu kà bo itàn you had five husbands;
itàn bo̤ taṅ nswinswi five is an odd number.

ited, nu. three; itedited b, three, three at a time;
ṅu bi Iǎ ited, bṳ̍ tso madzi mǒǎ’ baṅ, after three
months we entered another boat;
ntsundikàṅ ited three shots;
nàù le yè ṅka ited int happened three times.

 

