 

 

à, p. inan. 3. sg., also used for animates in clauses of purpose;
à I’n wù nd ndzo̤ nù le bo̤ a it is you who knows
how the matter is; à bo mu e? how is it? à ko e?
wwhat’s the matter? à kg nsuṅ wù bub it is only
you who says that; swi, à boṅ cescend safely.

à, p. poss:= sal l my; mf̤d à my brother;
k̍kad à ny basket.

à , associative particle to connect two pron. or pron. and noun, if
more than two nouns are to be connected; bg’ à Lima
we and Lima; boà lima they and Lima;
mfàòn fuṅ a by’ à bin the Fon called me and you (pl.);
i swi ma bom igòṅ bo nǎ i boà f̤d bi he went down
to the town with his mother and his brothers; (In
the literature at hand aà is written separably from
the preceding pronoun, in speech and in the written
word of the people as well as in this dictionary, it is
always connected with the pronoun).

a, p. obj. 1.sg. me; bo lab a they beat me.

a, p. poss. l. sg. cl t my; kù a my foot; ṅkèn a ny present;
note: tù a nu head.

a, syntactic particle at the end of most subordinated clauses
wě)hich are introduced by mbi’, mbi’ ndzo̤, ndzo, ndib;
γàṅ-làm fun bon-buyńi boà kěǎě, bo kà tsi a
the blacksmiths sell small knives and other things they
have made; a ndzǒ̤ bùn ndzamg ni nto n kě mbommbom
ma fun a that is how many people are coming with all
sorts of things to sell; I’ tǎn ndiò ti, mbi’ ńùm ni nta
titin a it is very hot today, because the sun is shining
very much.

alè, cj. therefore; used in referring to preceding information to .
take up the matter or draw some conclusion; mfòn kà
tso̤ûd sa’ le, alè bo mà’ti the chief has settled the
palaver, so they are leaving it.

B

b-, pref. al. 2, pl: of ae i m-

bà-, pref. cl. 2, pl. of ci. i N- (used for persons and animals) ;

bà ,, nu
bà, p. 1. pl.
bà , cj.

bàdǎ grandfathers; bàfad brothers; bàmbi goats;
bàgweè officers; bàl̤̯̤̀m vwitches, sorcerers; bàwo̤ who;
bànǎ mothers.

two (precedes the noun) bàṅka twice; barnì̇ka ̇wà’ni =
ṅwà’nn, à tse iba a second book or letter ;

bà yàb me’ both, both of them; u maà iiṅa’ṳ bo a ni
bà sili e? can you not lift my arm or hand with two
shillings; can you not give me a little help? § iba

incl. we, all of us; bà kǐ mà ntǎd o (̇gèni
nù bo̤ ve have not yet seen such a thing; bà bò we
(emphasized ); § bà

and, even (rarely used), i tsàbti i mfod (together)

bà ba i me’ se he blasphemed him and also even his
father; i tòn ndzù’ i, ntà̤̯mti bà ndab, à wu’ a me’

he burned his compound and all the houses there.

bà bub sě me’, interj. however it may be

ba, n. pl. bàba father, heir of compound. It is also an honourable

ba, v.

address for a man vbo is not related to anyone; bàba m,
my fathers; ba mṳ̯̍ my father; baàba bo bi ṅguṳṅgṳ our living
leaders of the tribe or nation; father caring
for another’ s child; bambod, bàbambod uncle, younger
brother of the father; bamvuka̯d, bàbamvukad uncle, elder
brother of father, often also: bavṅguka̯d, bàbaṅgukad.

be crazy, rage, ù bà ba e? are you mad? i ni mba ndù’
he is drunk; § mba

ba, p. poss. 1. sg., cl. )’ nw ; f̯̀d ba ny brothers

ba, p.coref. 1. sg. (always after the verb which is preceded by the

subj.p.). I, myself or as far as I am concerned; mà
nd. ba bo̤ I, myself, do not know.

people of (a certain tribe or region) ; bǎbǎ’ ṅgoòdṅ Gendzànṅ
the people of the town-quarter G.; bǎmadzi baṅ the pas-
sengers of the boat; yab the inhabitants of
their town; bǎmasi the inhabitants of the earth or
world; those of heaven; § bàma

 

 

: s
bà-Sama konourabtle title , conferred or bestowed on someone

bàb, n. pl. mbàb (ta- ma) vwing; mbǎbṅgob wings of a fovl, mb b-
tsò’ wings of an

bab, v. also: babli warm, roast, dry; bab mfǐ-ṅko̤̍ndòṅ dry
banana leaves (to be used as packing material); i babli
ṅgwàfṳd hae roasts maize; § toòn, ky

bab, p. poss. 3. pl.cl. 2 their; boòn bab me’ kà ku all their child-
ren died.

bab, p. coref. 3. pl. they themselves or on their part; bo kà bed
bab mà tum they themselves refused to go out or to
come out.

babli, v. warm § bab

bǎbndab, n. also: ndâbàmbàb original style of Bali house,
gable-roofed house, lit. two-winged house ; § bàmbab

bàbti, v. be broad, even, flat; nt si ma’ ndà i, ṅkù ma vù bàbti
I sat in his house waiting until my feet became flat;
§ mboti

bàbtì, adj. also: bàbtibàbti flat, even, broad

babtibà̯̯d, n. war-shield; i leti ked ni babtib̤̯d he catches the
arrows with the war-shield; § ob̤d

bad, n. also: badṅka small calabash, used for tapping palmwine
bad, n. milt, spleen
bad, v. add, follow, set on fire; ndab ntsi ṅwàṅ wàṅ, mo’ mbad

marṅko̤ṅ mò’ the houses stand in rows, one is close to
the next; i bad mu’ he sets on fire.

bad, n. addition to a house

bad, v. send; i bad ntum he sends a message; à b̌ṅ kòòb bad
bo i ndž̤m ùà i̇gâ, ù lin mà ye nù ṅgṳ̯ le may God send
his hand behind you that you may accomplish the big work

= may God be with you that you may accomplish a great
work ; § ntum

bad, v. plant, transplant (trees, seedlings); § b

bad, v. touch; § kǎd

k

s;
badndǎb, n. room sdded to the house
badṅka, n. also: bad small calabash, used for tapping palmwine
bàkàsì, n. skin of an animal ’s belly; § kǎbòm
bàkù̯, n. bachelor; §

bǎkùlan, n. those who did not wail at the funeral, but joined in
the eating = parasites.

bàm, n. (a-ba) bag; ntà n fa̤df̤d mà mbǎṅ bo̤; à bǎṅ bàm yab bo̤
bo ndzṳ yǎb yum bo̤ ńin strife among brothers is
not good; they should all be considered equal (the heir
of the compound should not think everything belongs to
him alone). bǎm kwaàkum bag with four parts;
§ kwa, pàdrik w̤n

bam, v. nourish, feed, rear; d mbam ṅgob ṅku e? are you
feeding sparrows and letting your chickens die? Pr. § sńoti

bàma ,, those (people) who; baàmadzf those who are inside;
bàmandun those who are on it; § b
bàmbab, n. two roofs; nda bàmbab a house with two side roofs,

gabled roof; § bǎbndab

bǎmfù, n. bag of medicine, amulet;
bon bǎmfù small amulets in little bags; § bon

bǎmyùjn, n. bag with present, lit. bag of the guest

bǎmkwàkùm, n. bag vith four parts

bǎmlèbbo, n. bag to be carried on arm

bǎmmfi, n. bag with special gifts; mg ko̤̍ n bǎmmfi I come with
gifts in the bag and you kill me for it = ingratitude is
the reward of the world; § fi

bǎmmfàòn, n. person in royal service

bǎmndeèbleb, n. also: bàm i ndèblàb basg to be hanged on the
shoulder

bǎmndzo , n. obligation, commitments ; bà leb bǎmndzo ni; bo b
we have taken upon us the commitment; bǎmndzo nď
b’ an obligation is upon us; § ndzo

 

-a
bǎmmṅwà nìntum, n. envelope; § ntum
bamtiì, n. scissors , tongs
bamti, v. join
bamti, v. cauat; barmnti cut hair.
ban, v. educate, keep under control, suppress;
i ban muṅkuṳ̯ he controls the child (so that it learns

to obey) bo ban mùn they co not let him speak;
i ban lo̤’ ma ntsi he presses the calabash into the

water.
bǎn, v. hide; i bǎn mu̯̤̍ he hid himself.
bǎn, v. hate; dziti bǎn bǎ-fotsù wisdom hates the Bafotsu =

their pretended wisdom caused their bad luck;

koòdmùn bǎn bà-Ti tohe giant power brought bad luck
to the Pati; m’bǎnn u I hate you; ṡkab bǎn bùn sisi
money befooled the black people = caused bad luck, be-
cause the use of it was not known; v’ kòṅ mùn, mbǎn ;
how can I hate someone whom I love; r koǎ̇ u, ù bǎn

a e’? ( love you and do you hate me? § bàni,
mbǎn

b àninduṅ, n. pl. of mùnninduṅ feoreigners, barbarians’

bàndoaṅ, n. ricinus communis, plant sp. whose seeds are used
for producing oil (oastor oil)

bàni, v. recipr. hate one another; no boà bùn ni mbanibàni the
snake and man hate each other.

bani, v. also: badni eavesdrop, peep, hide;
i bani mandz̯̀m ndab he hides behind the house ;
i bani mandz̤̀m tṳ he peeps from behind the tree.

bani, v. settle, sit down, alight; (insects, birds) ;
mysu̯n bani ni to̤n the bird alights on the oilpalm;
ndzǐndzi mà ni mbani ma l’ mommom bo̤ a fly
does not settle on a useless place (Pr .).

bàntì, n. tree sp., often used as pillars in building houses and
for plants; § mbaànti

banti, v. finish, close, settle; bo banti sa’ they settle the
law-suit; i banti tundab ni kṳ̍kǎ’ ndo̤̍ṅ he covers the
ridge of the grass-roof with young raphia ribs; § me’ ti

 

= s;

bàṅ , n. stick, cane; ńo ni nten baàṅ, bàṅ ni nten ńo (Pr) the
snake flees from the stick, the stick from the snake .

bàṅ, v. scrape of, peel off, e.g. bark; § bavṅti
:baṅ, n. boat; i tum baṅ lit: she left the boat, fig. she left her

husband (because of some trouble, the husband has to
reconcile her with palmwine and ten to twenty copper-

rings) .
baṅ, n. canoe, boat; §
bǎṅ, v. begin, start; à I’ wo̤ bàd e’? started the war ?

màn, i lǎ mbǎṅ ńkòd a, bo̤ wo̤ e?’ who started the fight?
§ obdd, bi’ni, dzě?, mbàṅba̤d

bǎṅ, v. be red, yellow, fly into passion;
à bǎṅ mè buṅ it is extremely red; ;
bd kà bṅ mè teue fight was very hot ;
ṅùm mà bàṅ the sun begins to turn red =
is about to set; § moàbàṅ, nsibàṅ, ntsibàṅ

bǎṅ, adj. also: bàṅbàṅ red, yellow; ndzi bṅ red cloth.

baṅbalì , n. also: baṅmbali red fruit of a tree with big stones,
thick skin and thin flesh layer of whitish colour.

bàṅbàṅ, adj. redupl. of bǎ̯̇ ced, yellow

bàṅka, adv. finally, gradually; be careful;
bàṅka, muṳ̯ mbuyṅ̤̌ ma yγíâ’ before long, I shall start from
here; bàṅka, nù u mà mbon bo̤ be careful, your manner
is not good; bàṅka, wu’ ńikòb le vo̤, ntsi naṅ finally,
the greatness of that god will perish;
bàṅka, mvi ke’ gradually, the world opens; it dawns.

bàṅko̤sṳ, n. pl. of vṅko̤sṳ̯ leaders
bàṅku̍b, n. cane; § ko̤b
baṅmbalì , n. red fruit of a tree; § barn badi
bàṅmfòn, n. royal sceptre
n. Indian bamboo, bush-stick;
i wu’ bo̤ wu’ bàṅmfo’ his greatness is as big as a

hollow bamboo pole (his impressive appearance is
pretence).

 

 

bàṅmi’, n. inflammation of the eye

bàṅmon, n. small stick painted with camwood powder on the
door to the room of a new-born boy

bàṅmumbuṅ, n. albino

bàṅndù’, n. excellent palmwine; § ndù’

bàṅni, v. lay cross-wise, strut; § ty mbàṅnibàṅni
bàṅni, v. be reddish; § bṅ

bàṅnìbàṅnì, adj. reddish, yellowish

bàṅnifà’, n. a small section of a farm; § vgoṅfa, lenfà’

bàṅnsi, n. ebyss, hell; u la’ ku, u sw’ ntse ma bàṅnsi you will
die and go down to hell; § fenmu

bàṅntṳm, n. foolhardiness, rashness; easily provoked; §
bàrṅsòbnsi, n. wooden stick with iron point
baṅtiìi, n. stick to carry loads;
i baṅti he carries it with a stick at both ends;
yǎ baṅti ntan wu’ e ? = y ṅkab mà yǒ̤ ntan wu’ e?

do you have money to go to the market?

baṅti, v. carry with a stick with a burden at both ends, esp.
calabashes with palmwine; bavniti ndù’; § lo’

baṅti,v. scrape; § kw, bàṅ

baṅti, v. stick fast; put a stick across a passage door or road,
in order to prevent. someone from passing through;
ko̤n baṅti n;’ moâtǎṅ i the little bone stuck in his
throat; § le’ ni

bàṅtṳ, n. wooden stick, tree used for charcoal

bàṅtṳn, n. iron stick

bàṅṳ̯̀, v. red dye

bàtàṅgṳd, n. fathers of a tribe

bàti, n. thought, thinking; § bàtinù, mbàti

;:

bàti, n. any calabash filled with palmwine, used when going
on a journey

bàti, v. hope, suppose, mean

bati, v. follow; boṳ̍ bati i wu’ we follow him thers;
à bo ni ntsu’ le, à bati a on the following day.

bati , v . pack carefully; ; bati k ni waṅ articles in a row.
bàtinù, n. thought; mǒ’ bàtinù wu’ e?’ any more idea? ; § baci, và

bà’, n. side, region, quarter, party fraction;
à ni bà’ bo i, n lum it is on his right side;
à γ̤̌ ni bà’ mân ; that which refers to his child;
bo sani bà’ iba they split up into two groups;
sa’ bà ńin mà mbǒṅ bo̤ to administer justice partially
is not good;
y bà’ mvi this part of the world;
bo kǎ ndǒ’ bà’ ma (Li bàvu they came from the region
of the ead sea;
i tsi ni bà’ bàfònfòn he is on the side of the chiefs;
bà’ kṳ̯mvi outside, outer part;
bà’ north;
bà’ madz inside, inner part;
bà’ mantsońùm vwest;
bà’ east;
bà’ ma wu’ in that region;
bà’ mvi ikwà the four chief points of the compass;
bà’ ndza̤n on the other side;
i tsi ni be’ bà ndza̤n he lives on the other side.

ba’ , v. weave, plait; ba’ bàm vweave a bag;
ba’ kad pruait a ring to place a calabash on it;
ba’ là’ plait an eel-buck;
ba’ ndzi weave cloth; ba ṅk̀ make a rope;
ba’ tu braid hair, plait hair; §

ba’, v. be present, be here;

m’ ba 1 am bere (response) ; i ba’ he is here;

bo ba’ they are here; m’ a’, ni nto I am coming.
bà’ bà ’, adv. on both sides

ba’ mvi, n. part of the world; yo ba’ mvi this part of the world

ba’ mvi. v. deceive, feign. dissemble, disguise ;
mn ò ba’ mvi ti that person feigns..

 

= :

ba’ ndzifu, n. strong strap to fasten the skin in which the
baby is carried (on the back); § koyâmon, ṅgùbmon

Bà’ nì, n. Bali-town, the Bali people;
Ba’ ni mvìimvi born bali; § ṡguli

ba’ ni, v. lie, habit of lying, mendacious excuse; § fàbsutn,
gau, f̤ti
ba’ni, v. excuse oneself;

ba’ ni ṅgum confusing the matter by excuses
ba’ṅgàm, v. devise a trick
ba’ ṅgàṅ, v. challenge with strong words; § sen
ba’ ni nù, v. hush up, keep a matter dark; fake, falsify;

ù ba’ni nù, ù Inn a, nsuṅ i e?’ you falsify

something you know and you say something else?

bà’tì, n. half a piece; bà’ti ndzi half a piece of cloth;
bà’ti tṳ a piece of wood ; § ko̤b

b̯̀d, n. wvoalr, fight, strife;
bad vǐ madzò’ bo war started among them;
bo mà’ yab ni bad they made war against them;
§ babtiba̤d

b̌dntsù, n. dispute, lit. war of mouth
ban, v. break, bend, crack ;
bd i ba̤n mṳ̍ his arm is broken;
bo ba̤n fòn they force their way through the grass
by bendinsg ist;
bṳ̍wi ba̤n ṅgwàfṳd the women break off the cobs of maize;

banti, v. break down, humble down, collapse

bati, v. ask, demand, bes ;
i kà bati ṅkab mb i he begged for money from him.

be, n. profit; § ndz̤̀mntan

be, p. dem. pl. (placed after the noun) these (already mentioned)
bùn be tse mṳ̍ these people have arrived; § le

beb, v. guard, expect, observe, hope, wait; beb wu’ wait there;

 

bebli, v.

bed, n.

bed, v.

bed , v.

běd, n.

= 22 -

molest, be hot; ntsi ni mbebli ntsù a, à boṅ mà fùbti
the water is too hot for my mouth, it is better to
sip only.

castrated buck

castrate; ṅ’ kà bed kuńàm à (̇gíâ, à wu’ mboṅka̤ d
I castrated ny pig that it may become very big.

refuse, decline; i bed he declined;
mfòn ka bed i̇gâ, i mà ṅko̤ yab m’ bo̤ the chief
refused to receive them again.

cowrie for casting lot;

bèd i laṅ mṳ̍ his lot has won;

i 1ǎ̌’ mbàùm i, nť̤m bèd mṳṳ̯̤̌ lit. he takes his body and
casts it as a lot = he stakes his life, is foolhardy;

§ mbogm, laṅ, ť̤n, moâbèd

bedkuńàìm, n. castrated boar

bèmon, n.

bèṅni, n.

beṅti, v.

bèti, v.

be’ , v.

be’ ànga, n.

bè’ li, v.

present for a new-born child, meal for the visitors who
come to greet the child; mà y beèmon prepare the baby-
feast; mà dzṳ̯ bèmon take part in the baby-feast;

ntsu’ mvi bǎṅgam ntsoòb itàn madz ṅu ecember, yi, à

bo̤ Lesoa a, bo̤ ntsu’ bèmon Nikob, à bo̤ ntsu mas;

bo ni ṅg̤ ma ndab, mbi’ ni mà ni ndzṳ kǎ mbòṅkad ;

à bo̤ bèmon (ikòb bub on the 2Sth of Pecember which

is called Lesoa, Bemon Nikàb is celebrated, i.e. mas;
people go to the church, then they begin to enjoy good
things; this is the feast of God’.

stand aside, get out of the way, sneak away;
i bèṅni à he. avoids me; § lo’

carry; bo beṅti kun they carry the bed; § ts̤m, lo’
sharpen, point, be pointed ;

yedbagbag bo̤ muńibà̤d i sisà, ), tù i bèti a edbagbag is
a sword whose end is pointed; § syγṅ

be there (away from the speaker) ;

mfàn le be’ there is the chief ;

bo be’ they are there; 3. ba’, ain fe;

herb, plant whose leaves and flowers are used to
cure or treat frontal headache

pretend to be poor; beg; (although there is money to pay)

 

 

be’

be’

be’

bi,

bi,

bi,

b

bi,

bi,

bi,

bi,

n . No
Li, V.

ti, v;

n. also:

p. . pl.

w
f
rear carefully, feed emaciated person, strengthen him
be dogmatic; § fgavbe li
trade; i be’ti ntan heis trading ; § yan ntan
cola nut; àù ven bi, k kiti kuṳtṳ̯ e? (Pr.) do you pick up
cola nuts without looking up at the tree (said to one
who is ungrateful) ?

nbi, n. liver; § mbinto̤̍nka̤d,

you; b γ̤̌ ma ntan e? are you going to the market?
bi l’n nù le you know the matter; § cin, bin

p. rel. pl. who

adj.

p. poss.

bàfòǒnfòn, bi, bo kà bim nàù le a, kǎ mà mbi soòbni mbi’

le bo toue chiefs who had agreed had never regretted it;
bàba bo, bi ṅgṳṅgṳ̯ our fathers, the big ones;

§ yi, i

be done (of food), be true, be experienced ;

i bi mu̯̍ he is mature, experienced;

kǎm, à bi, ù dzi mi (Pr.) first chew well, then swallow =
consider well before you act;

nd, à bi a a thing which is true; § bi’, mbikad, bikad,
bini

transform o. s.; perform miracles; § sà, (̇gàṅ-sà,
ṅgàṅ-mṳ̍ńùṅ, mb bi
faithful, true; yo bi nsun à he is ny faithful friend;

§ mbikad

3: ss: el; 2 his;
fd bi bomma ti bim i bo̤ his maternal brothers and
sisters do not acknowledge him.

bi, p. coref. 3. sg. he himself, on his part;

bi,

(mbi) cj.

i γǒ̤ mǔ̯̤ bi he has gone, he himself ;
i mà mbim bi bo̤ as far as he is concerned, he does
not agree.

marker to denote temporal clauses (placed between tense
marker and verb): when, as, whereas, whenever ;

i kà bi kwe , ba i kà’ni i when he returned

home, his father rebuked him; ndib ù Iǎ mb to a, (ṅgwi

à bo 1ǎ’ mbo̤ γǒ mǔ̯̍ when you arrived, my wife had already

left; negative: mà mbi....bo̤ never;
ba

 

- -

yoò mùn mà mbi tsu mè bo̤ that man has never spoken thus;
ṅ’ kǎ mà mbi ted suṅ yò nù mb bin bo̤ I have never told
you that ;

mà̯ mà mbi yǎ yò nàù bo; I have never done that.

bf, v. plant, sow; i bn ṅgwàfṳd ṅkěǎě§mkèm she plants the maize
alternately; § mb̌kò̯mdoòṅ, bad, mbifà’

bià, compl. p. ?.pl. e-g. bià yi you and he ;
bià bo you (pl.) and they; bii you and he

bibe’ , p. dem. pl. those ; § ibe’

bibli v. get blisters ;
mu’ tn bò a, à bibli fire burned his hand, so that he
got blisters .

bika̤d (mùn) adj. true; § mbikgad, bi

bǐkù , n. pl. (a- ma) thigh; § kàù

bìla’ , p. interr. pl. who, which; § ia’, le’, bile’

bile’, p. interr.

bim, v. acknowledge, agree, consent, believe ;
i bim ṅǩ̤nti he consents, but does not really agree;
bo bim they agree reluctantly ;
i bim màùn lit. he has become a human being = he has
recovered; §

bimni, v. be wavering, be inconsistent

bimnìibimni, n. flattery

bìmo’, p. indef. pl. others, any, some;
bu’ à bima’ ve (or I) and others;

bimo’ .... me’ teoae others ... all;
bìmo’ ṅgòṅ bà’ ma wu’ le other towns in that region;
§ m§ǒ’

bin , p. indep. ?. pl. you;
i kà y6ě yò nù le mbi’ bin he did it for your sake;
bin sǎ, bi kǎ mà mbim bo̤ you also did not agree; § cin

bin, p. poss. ?.cl. 2 your;
bàòn bin là ni mànd?zi le, bi kǎ nna’ ti mbò bo a your
children follow the way, you have shown them.

 

 

 

sa; :

bin, p. coref. 2. pl. on your part, you yourself

binbì , p. recipr. 2. pl. also: bìn nì bìn you (reciprocal, mutual)

bini, v.

biṅ, v.

biṅgàṅ, v.

biṅni, v.

biṅtì, n.
biṅti, v.
bitsarṅ, n.
bi’ n.

bi, v:

bi’ ni, v.

bi’ ti, v.

bǐ mà mfàbsuṅ (bn n; bìn) bo̤ do not tell lies
to one another.

be experienced, on both sides experienced ;
i bini ni fà’ i he is experienced in his work ; § b:;

lay a snare; attire, adorn, dress up;

i ṅkò’ , ṅgwě’ ndzàb̤̍ he sets a trap and catches

a cutting grass;

ṅ’ka bi to, buṳ̯mbàṅ be mbiṅ mbùm bab, mm’’ ndzi mboṅkad,
bùwi ni ṅgwe’ mfa, ni mbṳ̌B mbùm yab vhen I

arrived, the men had adorned themselves and had put

on their beautiful gowns; the women had dressed up

and wore peirls.

play, juggle (with a string laid around neck and hands
which can be loosened by a trick; also with corn which
can be made to disappear) ;

i biṅgàṅ ni kě ba i he gambles with his father’s
posses sions.

evade, shirk (work) ;
u ni mbiṅni ti you shirk work whenever possible;
§ banni, lo’

a sling, a trap

trap (animals) ; also: fig.; § tamndzo

small herb (for meals); § nto kind of vegetable
kernel, stone of some fruit

push, box; bi’= maà ab titi flog heavily;
i kà làb i bi’ i, mmà’ i masi he slapped him much,
pushed him and threw him down; § ab, esi’, bi, děǎg

begin; o ka bi’ni fà’ le ndiko e? when did you start
the work? i bini mà Io’ ti nù le mbo bìmo’ bùn he
began to talk about the matter to other people;

§ mbaribà̤̯d

as v. aux.: bo sun ṅgâ, Elia la’ bi ni to ṅkuṅ

it is said that Elijah will come before.

grind very fine ;
à b̌ṅ ù kà ṅkuṅ, ndzi bi’ ti ( Pr.) , lit. it is good, if you

 

6

grind the maize coarsely first and then very fine = lay
first the foundation before you build .

bit; v; repeat, confirm, plant again;
bi’ti nù le, ù kà kyumti a repeat what you have memorized;
boà bo bi’ti laṅndab, ndǎb they beat the new floor again;
§ adz̤̀mti

bò, p. indep. 1. pl. incl. we;
à lin kwà’ bo nazo̤̍ nù le bo̤ a we know what the matter is.

bò, p. obj. 1. pl. incl. us ;
bo 1ǎ’ ntsǎ bò kwà’ mboṅkad they surpassed us easily.

bò, p. poss. 1. pl. incl. our; a ndaâ bo it is our house .

bò, p.coref .l. pl. incl. we; bǎ mà nù le, i ni ntsu a,
ńdṅ bò bo̤ voe do not know what he is talking about,
we ourselves.

bò, p. dem. pl. these; bo bon kà tse ni’̤”koù’ these people
arrived yesterday; boò boùn ro e? = bàùn bò yo ya e?
where are these people going? § o, yo

bo, n. pl. mbo (a-ma) hand, arm, handle of s.th.;
b a ny, hand;
mbdò ma ny hands; b i ex6̇ mǔ̯̍ his hand is stiff;
bd i ṅu’ti mṳ̍ his hand is clenched tightly;
à ti’ ni bo it is at hand; zigobvṅ ti’ ni; bò u, u ti k̤̀
ṅkṳ̯mti Nikòb e?’ have you become the mayor of the
town, so that you forget God?
tâ’ bo ndzi ńin one yard of cloth;
bo iba two measures, fathoms; n; bo lum right hand;
ni b’ bo a, i kob to the left side;
ni bǎ’ bò a, in lum to the right side;
ù Iǎ’ ni mbo ti you steal like a cat.

bo, v. fold, wind; bo bo myṳ̍ kàd they wound a pead for carrying
things on the head ; § boci

bo, p. indep. 3. pl. they;
bo sěg suṅ nù mbò i they also speak to him.

bo, p. 3. pl. they, (also used to circumscribe passive forms) ;
bo la’ tse ni ṅgàb they will arrive in a week;
bo yâ, i yǒ̤ mṳ̌ bi it is said that he had left;
bo kà vi i ni ṅu, à kà lǎ a he was born last month.

bâ, cj. and; used in sg. only Fe bo Sama kà y ma ntan

 

boà,

bofaà,

- ň̤ :

Fe and Sama have gone to the market:;
boi he and he, both; bov̍ Sàbùm he and Sabum;
wo e’? hae and volo else ?

1. cj. and; (sed in plural only) ;

Bà’ ni boà Bamufut kà mà’ bd ni t’̯n the Bali and
the Bafut were fighting against one another.

2 comp§p: 3.’pl;

boà yi they and he; boà bo he, she and they;

boà Sàbùm she and Sabum; boà bàwo̤ e?’ vbo else
besides them?

lit. they give = be able, may, can;

bofà, ù ti wa’ a, m vg (ìkańin bo̤ you cannot leave me in
the lurch, so that I am lost for ever;

bofà, à tso wo̤ ntso i ni bd e?’ who can go to war
against him?

boi, compl.p. 3. sg., hae and he

boli, v.

boli, v.

bom, v.

bom, v.

bomti, v.

bomcti, v.

bon, n. pl.

anoint, mitigate, soothe, allay ;

i boli ndzo hae nitigates’ his debt (he offers the

creditors a nice meal, so that they may become considerate) ;
i boli ntso̤’ mi he blunts the sharpness (of his sword).

bow; gì’kǎ mboli yà masi I bowed down;

mvi ni mboli mas’ ù the world bows before you;

bo ni mbi mas mfòn, mboli yàb mas’ i whenever
they pass in front of the chief, they bow before him.

form, model;

bââ̍m mbàṅ ni tsa’ the women make pots with clay;
bo kà boâ̍m nṅgoòṅ yab ni tsa’ ntòntǎn they have built their
town with bricks; § mbom, bomti, γǒ̤ mbomti

gather, meet ;
bo bom i they gather round him; § ko’ mṳ̤̍, ts ’, bomti

bear, have patience ;
i bòmti mbṳ̤̍ka̯d he is patient with the
evildoer.

gather, meet, come together, close (of flowers) ;
i bomti yab ma mòǎ’ Iṳ̤’ he gathers them at some place;
ntoloṅ bomti the flower closes itself; § bom

of mon children, small things ;
bon bǎmfù small amulets;

bondzàò, n.

boti, v.

bot, n.

bòbli, v.

g:

bonkěǎ small things, also: insects ;

small colocasia, tubers;

bonmaàndzi mṳ̍màṅ small secret paths;

bonmbod babies, weak children; ;

bonmfi’ ndâ ianà small copies of the temple of iana;

bonmfòn children of the chief, often called Sama =
honourable name;

bonṅge rafters; bonpò̤m small spots;

bonta children of the father;

fd ba bonta paternal brothers (and sisters) ;

bontswa’ ṅgoṅ little villages;

bon tumfàù little tips of leaves.

debt accepted from another person;
ṅko̤ bondzo agree to pay the debt (of another person).

fold, wind (fùṅkù̯ndòṅ); § bo, kad
pl. mbotṳ, branch

be lukewarm, warm; § bǐ bobli

bòblibòbli, adj. luke warm

bobṅgṳṳ̀ṅ, n.

bod, v.

bodtu, adj.

bòm, n.

bom, v.

n.

flour (of wheat, maize)

be weak ;

ńùm bod the sun is about to set;

i bod ni nà le ti he slackens in his zeal;

§ mbodka̤d, bambod, dǎmbod, kǎmbod, níâmbod,
mombod, ndimbod, mbo̤nùm

turned gray early; hoary ;
i bo̤ bodtu he grows hoacy (early) .

(a-ma; ta-ma) belly; inner part of man, stomach;

bo bouṅṳ̯ ku̯tṳ̯ ni tso’ ma boòm yab they got

up red-hot with passion;

i ta b̌̌m nsun i be jerked his friend’s stomach (with
his middle finger and said’, if you reveal the secret,

I have just told you, your stomach will burst open).

search out, inquire into (cunningly, artfully); § mm
womb of mother = matermnal line ;

fd bi bǎmma brothers and sisters of the same
mother; § nǎ, mà

 

 

 

boni, n.

boni, v.

bòṅ, n.

bǒ̠ṅ, v.

bàòṅgù, n.

.’
peace, blessing, security

be peaceful, be humble; § mbonikad,
mfonika̯d

goodness, kindness, beauty, good deeds;

bo sarṅti bòṅ màùn, i kà ndze nd bo a they remember
the good deeds, he has done to them;

bàṅ ndù’ mà mbo̤ ma s ’ ka’ bo (Pr.) the goodness
of palmwine does not depend on the cleanliness

of the calabash; § bǒṅ̍màndzi.

be good, beautiful, pleasant, like s.th. or s. b.;

à boṅ, ndza’ mbà it is excellent ;

à bòṅ mfamni it is perfect; .

nù le bǎṅ i ti the matter pleases him, he likes it;
lâ, à b̌ṅ pass good , good journey;

ù b̌ṅ a ti like you, lit. you please me;

à b̌ṅ it is good, alright; § mboṅka̤d, ntumbo(n,
bǎṅntṳm

tree sp. whose branches form a circle, the bark
is used as medicine; also:

bàòṅka̤d , adj. (preceding the noun) good;

i bo̤̍ bàṅka̤̯d mùn he is a good man.

bě̌ṅnìlùm, n. herb sp. which does not dry up during the dry season;

fig.: u boṅnilùm you are there when everything goes well.

b̌ṅntṳm, n. good nature, goodness, spontaneity ;

bǒ̤ṅnù, n.

bo kà bim nàù le ni bǎṅntṳ̯m they agreed voluntarily ; § nt’̯m

acquittal, absolution ;
bo kà fâ bǎṅnù mb màùn le they acquitted him.

baṅṅkwin, n. big piece of firewood

bòṅṳ, v.

bòṅṳ̯, v.

do something early, be early;

to bàṅṳ mà to I shall soon come;

a to bo̤ ni mb’ mbà’, n’ ti bàòṅ̤̀ mà γǒ̤ bo̤ in the
morning I shall not go so early.

make good, answer for;
i bàṅṳ̯ lṳ̯ṅ mùn he restores the name of someone.

boti, v. also: bo̤dti be soft, become soft

bò’, n.

mushroom

 

=

bo’, n. fear; bo wě bùn me’ fear took hold of

everyone.

bo’, n. hole, cave, valley; à ts’ṳ̯m bo’ it fell down with
a plop.

bo’, v. fear s.th. or s.b.; be afraid ;

i bo’ mà yγǒ̤ wu’ be is afraid of going there;
i bo’ mfa̤d n ti he is very much afraid of his brother.

b̌’bàṅ, n. edible fungus sp. (found on trees)
bo’ bo’, adj. uneven, rough, bumpy

b̌’ fifi, n. mushroom sp. (etdible, small)

bǒ̤ làm, n. melon, pumpkin, cucumber

b

lo

’mbiyaṅ, n. also: mbo’ mbiìyaṅ , dish (food) of groundnuts; § ko̤̍mbam
bo’ mb’, v. make a pap, bake a cake of groundnuts; § mb

ba’ ni, v. be afraid of on another (recipr.) ; bo bo’ni bonibo
they fear oneanother

bǒ’ ṅgṳtàṅtàṅ, n. fungus sp. (edible, found on trees)

b̌’ sisùṅ, n. mushroom sp. (small, edible)

b̌’ sònsòṅ, n. mushroom sp. (edible)

bò’ ti, n. valley, plain

b̌ǎ̌’ tso̤’ tuṅ, n. fungus sp. (small, edible, found on cead trees)
b̠̌’ wu’, n. mushroom sp. (edible, it makes man big)

bo̤, v. be, exist ;
i boo̤ mfòn, mbo̤ ba mù s heis a chief as well
as ny father.

bo̤, (mbo̤ṳ tense marker to denote terminative action in the past
and future; u bi to me, ṅgwi à bo̤ Iǎ’ mbo̤ γǒ̤ mṳ̍
when you come nov, my wife has left;
i kà bo yoò he had already gone
i kà yo mfa̤d n, i bo̤ tsi mat t’ṳ he saw his
brother sitting under a tree;
with to or a’: afterwards, later (in connection with s.th.
already reported) ;

 

 

:

à to mbo̤ mandzà̯m it was later;
à la’ mbo̤ ni moǎ’ ntsu’ it happened another day (ater).

bo̤, emph. particle only, actually;
bo yàbti tufà’ bo̤ ni; bèd they distributed the
official duties by castings lots;
mù̀ ni nnuyṅ bo̤ ntsi bin I baptize you with
water only;
bo f̯ni bo̤ bàwo̤ mè e?’ whom a-re they really like?
nuɑ̌mfǎn N’kòb la’ to bo̤ ndikoo̤ e? when wmill the
kingdom of God appear?
my ti’ mǎ’ ndâm bo̤ mbi’ à suṅ wàù a I uill only let
down the net at your command;
i suṅ bo̤ ṅgâ, boni, ṅgǒ̤ ma ntsù ndíâ ù he only said
to him get up and go home.

bo̤̤, neg. particle at the end of the negative phrases which are
introduced by ma, kṳ̤̍ or ti
i mà mbo̤ bo̤ he is not at home;
but: i mà mbo̤ (without bo̤) he is not here.

bǒ, cj. marker to denote clauses of condition (followed by the
prenas. form of the verb, the main phrase is often
introduced by mbo̤); when;
m’ bǒ̤ mfuṅ u, ù to when I call you, you have to come;
ù bǒ̤ nsa’̯ yò kàò’ le, mbo̤ ù to vu ma ntsi if you cross
the bridge, you will fall into the water.

bo̤b, n. pl. bàbo̤̤ěb uncastrated billy-goat ;
bob a le kà vo ny hbilly-goat disappeared ; § fodmbi

bǒ̤n, v. give honourable name (to sub-chiefs)
bǒ̤n, v. fall backward, fall on back
b’, n. rodent sp. (with grey fur and a bushy tail of some

2 cm and length of body of 2 cm).
bo’, v. break off (cobs of maize), cut off”out
bo̯’li, v. call a friend by sounding ua ua ua’
b̯̀’ṅgob, n. hen-coop
bu, p: poss. 2”sgtel your;
fd bu kǎ ṅgyemti u ti your brothers helped you

very much.

bu, p. coref. 2. sg. you yourself, on your part;

 

bub, ad.

bubti, v.

bubun, n.

-

ù bu nù le e?’ co you, yourself, know what is
the matter?

so, as mentioned (before) ;
à yè bub it happened as mentioned;

à mà mbo̤ bub e? is it not so? § mè

spoil, rot, perish, spend, break, damage, ruin;

i bubti kě ndzamuṳ̯ he wasted a lot of things;

i bubti ṅkab ndzamuyṳ he spent a lot of money;

i bubti mṳ̌ ndam he broke the marriage;

i bubti fsu ; he stammers;

i bubti ntṳ’ he, she altered the will (it was
interpreted differently than expected) ; § ntg’, nan,
kamù, tàby

marrow of young palm ribs, (ndoṅ, nd̤ );
bon boṅkṳ̯ ni ṅkuṳ̯m lo̤ṅ ni bubuṅ the children make
stools with the marrow of ribs.

chimpanzee

begin, establish, found, start;

bo bd nù mfi they started a new thing;

nǎ ù bd mà to yâ’ bo̤ ndi e? is this the first

time your mother has come here ?

ù b̌dbod kà, ù Iǎṅlǎṅ e? are you starting trouble or
are you taking revenge (this is asked , when s o. is
causing evil without obvious reason)? § ba, bini,
mbariba̯se

bùd mfàòn, v. greet a sub-chief respectfully ;

bùγù̯, n
bùli, v
bulùṅ, n.

, h

ṅ’kà yo̤ Fokemba ma maàndzi, mbàùd i (ṅgâ, ” zo”,
hands are not clapped, only folded; he is less honoured
than the chief of the whole town.

suppurating ulcer (very painful)

confound, entangle, confuse, disturb, upset;

bo boli ṅgòṅ they upset the town;

ù bàùli tu bùn ni nù le you confuse the people
with your speech; § mbodibuli, vaṅuṳ̯, t̤buṳ
fish otter, living on fish; way of greeting a prince;
m̌’ mo mfàòn kà tsà ti a, m’bim (i̇gâ, ṅ kǎ bulùṅ”
a prince greeted me anda I replied, ”fish-otter’
(this is the manner of honouring a prince) ;

mfòn bǒ̤ ntsà’ ti u, ù bim iṅgâí, “tsàb̤̍’ ke ”
when a chief greets you, you answer ”excellent’,

 

 

bum, v.
bùmti, v.
bumùì’ , n.

: =

or: leopard (this means the chief is the strongest,
he is above all).

fit, agree, meet;
yò ke’ fun this key fits; § bomci, ti’, knǐ̌mri

meet;
boi kà bùmti ma màndzi he net him on the road,
as arranged before; § bum

ash; ṅku’ le fu’ tù i n; bumù’ the widow covered her
head with ash; bumù’ ni mfu’ fu’ the ash is dusty.

bùn- pref. cl. 2, pl. of mù- (used for persons); § bùn

bùn, n. pl. of mùn people; bùn mommoàm ordinary people;

bun, v.

buṅti, v.

bùn ntoto newvw-comers;

bùn the living; bàkubùn the dead;

bùnbàṅ the white people;

bùn, bo ni nsa’u̯ ndza̤n mo’ ni baṅ a the ferry-men

be restless, uneasy, cause trouble, roll about ;

m̀ṅgwi le ni mbun vi this woman is in labour;
ṅgàṅdzaṅ ni mbun vu teonhe sick person is at

death’s door;

mà bun vi causing trouble; o ti’ mbun bo̤ ko e? why
do you cause trouble?

freguent affliction; § v̇go̤̠’
very red; a bǎṅ m bàùṅ it is red as fire.
idler, sluggard

loiter; i ni mbuṅbo̤ṅ kṳ̯mvi he is loafing about;
§ mbauṅ, mbuṅbuṅ

lack, miss; m’ burvṅ bà’ ti kapà I ceed half a penny;
fù’ mburṅ bàm have an opportunity but cannot seize it,
lit. luck is here, but I lack a ba;g (Pr.)

lay along, lie along;

bo kà ty le, à vù, mbuṅti, nnǎn màndzi they cut
the tree, so that it fell and lay across and blocked
the road;

ibe’ mbo̤ buṅti ma ndab, le bo ṅgâ, ku m̯̤̍ that
one is laid along in the house = he died in the house
màn, i nt̤̍n a, mà nd mà buṅti bo a strong person
cannot lie across;

 

kiti, nàmbà’ ni; le buṅti mǧ̤ ma v̇̇go̤̤ look, the horse
has died in the grass.

bu’, n. sg. of mbu’ bundle, packet; fig. also for pregnancy ;

bu v.

bu’ d le a kě’ bo̤ bu’ mbovṅka̤d e?’ will it be

a successful pregnancy? (in asking the oracle) ;

màùṅgwi le kě’ mg̯̤̍ bu’ le the woman has been confined;
§ bu’ ndzi, bu’ ṅwà ni, bu’ ṅgoòṅ

beat, bark, beg; maà bu’ luṅ play the organ, etc.
bu’ nadzo̤ṅ ’ ring the belli

bu’ ṅka̤̍nd̤̍ṅ ’ beat the drumi

bu’ ṅgṳ̍ṅ’ thresh corni § lb

b̤̍ ni mbu’ mb bìn we beg you (by clapping our hands) ;
ù kǎ nti’ mbu’ bo̤ vu he was at the point of death;
mvu̯ ni mbu’ the dog barks;

bo ni mbu’ ṅg̤̍m they yell with fingers vibrating
in the mouth = sign of accident, struggle or in
case of death;

bu’ mbèn kà lǎb mbi à, ńńǎ̌ ’ the lion struck my
sheep and killed it.

make holes (in palm ribs or timber for building
purposes);

bo bu’ ndab they perforate palmribs for the house;
bo b’ kun they perforate ribs for making a bed;

bo b’ lṅ they make a stool; § ndo̤ṅ

bu’ mbèn, n. lion

bu’ndab, n. holes in palmribs for constructing a house

bu’ ndzi, n. pl. mbu’ ndzi bundle of cloth, bale, pack; § tu ndzi, bu’

Bù’ ninduṅ , n. honourable name for the chief, because he does not

appear so quickly.

b̌’ ninduṅ , n. lizard sp. (coloured, about 3o cm l., red on both

sides; its saliva is supposed to make the skin tough,
yet by spitting, it causes a rash, extreme itching,
even death) ;

iddle: m’ bo̤ bùṅninduṅ, m’ bo̤ ntso, n’ ti ka̯̍ ntum
ku̯mvi bo iit. I am a lizard, if I go inside, I shall

not come out again;

k̤̍kub bo̤ nda̤n, i bà’ninduṅ when the lizard
grows old, it changes into a lizard with fine colours;
bàù’ ninduṅ bo̤ kṳ̍kub, yn, ṅwà’ i boṅ a a beautiful lizard
is one that has nice colours.

 

 

= s =

bu’ ṅgòṅ, n. pl. mbu’ ṅgòṅ; also: tswa’ṅgòṅ, tsu’ṅgòṅ little village;
§ ngoòṅ

bu’ṅgum, v. utter surprise or disgust at s.th. strange or bad

bu ti, v; hammer, beat, line (with gold), master, govern;
bo kà bu’ ti kuṅkàn ni gold, they lined the ark of
the ovenant with gold;
bàfònfòn ni mbu’ ti ni t̤̍n the kings rule with power;
§ ṅgàṅbu’ ti mvi

buù’̯, n. rest, remainder ;
i 1Ǐ’ bàù’ ṳ̯ ni ṅgǒ̤ m̤̌ he took the rest and went away
with it; i tswe’ni bo’ uṳ ṅgwa̤_d nd̤̀m he poured out
the last drop of oil; § wo’ ṳ

Bu’̯, v: remain ;
bàsogeà kà vo’ ti ṅgoòṅ me, kṳ̍ bù’ ṳ̯ yum bo̤ the soldiers
destroyed the town completely without sparing a
thing; § wo̤’ṳ̯, Iǒb

bu̯̍=-, pref. cl. 211. pl. of m- (used for persons and animals)

n. name of a village north of Babanki

bùndzǎd; n. pl. of mù̯ndzàd grandchildren

bǔ̯nù, n. problems; b̯nù bi dzam ti his problems are many.
bù̯wi, n. pl. of mṳ̀ṅgwi women

bu, n. camwood, (out of which a powder is made and mixed with
water or oil and used as paint for weaving cane; or
as ointment for the body)
bìmo, ta’ ni yab ni b̤̍ mbi’ fom ndzi some rub their
bodies with camwood, because they lack clothes;
bo ta’ ni bṳ̍ ṅgâ, mbùm yàb bǒṅ they also rub camwood
to beautify their bodies or to feel good.

bù, p. l. pl. excl. we (apart from the others);
alè. bo̤̍ boli y’, ṅgǒ̤, ti’ bimo’ okay, we turn around,
go and meet others.

bṳ̌, p.1l. pl. excl. in neg. sentences: we
b̤̌̌ mà ṅgǒ̤ ma ntan bo̤ we shall not go to the market.

bd, v. turn, change, translate, interprete, reply;
ù b̤ûd yò sa’ le ndzǒ̤m nda tsi you are manipulating
this matter in favour of your brother-in-law’s family;

 

= ;:

bo b̤̌d mu̯̤̍ nt̤̀ yab they have had a change of heart;
bo bd mbào i (̇gâ, kṳ̍ l̇n e?’ They replied and said

why not’, lit. not be able?

i bd tsu mfòn mbòṅka̤d he interpreted the chief well;
ta màùn ńin ti b̤̌d nù a bo̤ not a single person stood
up for me (interpreting my cause in the law-court) ;

§ mbo§̤dnù, bo̤li

bu̯’ kad, adj. preceding the noun bad (operson) ; also: màùn
mù mbyṳka̯d = bad person nù malice

bṳli, n. drain (to catch fish) ;
biìmo’ bànǎ kà γǒ̤ mà wě nsu ma ntsi, bo tsa̤d bo̤i mà
wǎ su some womaen went to catch fish in the water,

they dammed up the drain, in order to catch fish;
§ bd

bṳ̯li, v. turn, send back, decant:;
bo b̤̍li yàb mè yàd they turned quickly;
boli yù ṅkiti a’ turn and look at mel
b̤̍ b̍li y̤’ we turn round;
bo b̤̍li ndù’ they poured the wine (into another vessel) ;
§ bd, dzamuy, ko̤bti

bǔmfo , n. camwood rubbed in, when having a cold; § mfo’

bu̯n, pl. mb̯n (a-ma) breast, nipple;
ṅ’ ko mb y màùn, lit. I receive from this person
the breast of his mother = I am his or her follower;

§ ntsi ṅgàṅńoṅbuṳn

bu̍ndùṅgònndàm camwood, used to rub the bridegroom and
his clothes.

bṳ̀ni, v. return, go back
bù̯nmbi, n. udder of goat, goat s milk
b̯̀nmfàòṅ , n. udder of the cow, cow’s milk; § nctsi by̯n ńamntsi
bu̯’nù, n. much evil, sin, punishment;
mà fa buy’nù mbò màùn, i kà fǐǎn a to punish
someone who commistted a crime.
bu̍ṅgònndam, n. camwood to rub into the body of the bride
bṳ̌ṅ, v. refer to, appeal to the person who made the

promise; boast a promise; ;
Ba kǎ ṅkǎǐ̌ bâàn (or: bǧ̤ṅ bùn) ni ze’ni le Iǎ’ ni

 

 

bṳ̀ṅni, v.

bu̯ṅni, v.

s:

ndib ky̯s̯ God the Father had promised to send
his Spirit to the people long ago;

i kǎ bo̤ luṅ ba i = i kà nugyṅ nt i nd ba i
he referred :insistantly to his father’s name =

he had confidence in his father;

i kà mbàùm i ṅgâ, i mo ̇ikòb he confirmed to
be the Son of cod,;

i mfòn he showed off with the chief;

i ba i hae boasts of his father.

change; ṅwana kà bo̤ màùn i ba’, mbo̤ bṅni
màd i, nti màù (i(wana was a little man; here he is
and has changed his appearance (has become big) ;

§ kybti, mbùm ;

roll o.s.; form a bale; §

bṳ̀ṅsi (mbùm), v. brag, boast;

buṅntsì, n.

buṳṅṳ̯, v.

bṳ̀ti, v.

i bo̤ṅsi mbùm i ti he is boasting too much.
section of water, where fish can be caught; § gorvni̇’ntsa

rise, set out;

bo buyṅṳ̯ ma yγǒ̤ suṅ yab they went to attack them;
yg nà, ṅ’ kà buyṅṳ mas mǔ̯ a I am used to this
since childhood ;

bu̯ṅṳ̯ ku̯tṳ̯ rise; buṅṳ marṅko̤ṅ ma̤̍ get away; § sà’ni

object, contradict, change;

i kǎ mb̤̍ti tsu buṳ à bo kwà’ nintṳ̍n he severely
contradicted us;

i mà ni mbuycti bi bo̤ he does not change, he remains
as usual.

boil, bubble; ntsi ma wo̤t̤la wu’ mà bo̤ti titi
the lake was billowing, was choppy ;
ntsi le bo̤̍âi e?’ is the water boiling? §

bù’ , p. indep. 1. pl. excl. we

bṳ̯̌n;

bṳ’ , b̤̌ mà ndǐh mà bim nù le bo̤ we cannot

agree to it;

i to fa ṅwà’ni le mb b̤ he umill give us the book;
§ m, w, y, bin

the evil, the ugly;

bo foli bṳ̯’ they exorcize the evil (by blowing
over the hand or spitting on a stone and throwing
it away); § mbuṳkad

 

bi, v:

be bad, ugly; dislike;

à by’ yab it displeases them;

ntgà̤̍ yab bṳ̯’ ndù bo they were angry with them;
tù a head ny is bad’ = I have bad luck;
§ mb’, mbuykad, by’ nù, fàn, fǐ§nnù

bu, p: 1 plen oues;

bn by’ our children

bu̯’ , p. coref . i. pl. excl. on our part;

b̤̍ ni ntsaṅti tsàṅti, ndzǒ̤ b̤̍ bǒ̤ ni mbod
bu’, bf ntṳn bin a we are happy with ourselves
when we (on our part) are weak, but you, your-
selves, are strong ().. cor. I3, ?).

by’ compl1 ses ( and :

bṳ̯’ nǎ m I and my mother; bu’ ù I and you;
mg, bu’ ù I, together with you;

bu’ i I and he; by Su I and Su;

bu’ wo e’? I and vbo else?

b’ù t’ mà kwe. and you want to return

bu̯’ à, compl. p. i. pl. I and, we and ...

bu̯’ nù, n.

b’ à woo̤ e?’ ve and vflo else?

b̯ à wù we and you; bu’ à yi we and he:

by bin we and yoau (pl.);

bṳ̯’à bo we aund they;

nǎ y’ we and our mother;

bu̯’à bànǎ y’ we and our mothers;

Su we and su; b aà bà-Su we and the Sus;
wo̤ e?’ ve, I and vho else ?

bṳ’à bàwo̤ e?’ we and vlbo else (pl.) ?

injustice, wrong;
bu̯’nù kà bo y the injustice was on his side.

 

 

 

dǎdà, n. stretch out ; sometking to aid a baby toddle;
i yǎ dǎdà he stretched out his hands to make the
child walk towards him; (a sort of gangway is made
of palmribs with rails on either side for a child to
learn to walk) .

dàg, n. dice; bo mâ’ dàg they play dice; § som

dǎṅ, v. claim everything for o. s. (heritage) ;
bo fa kěǎdzy ṅgâ, boà mfa̤d ) dzy, i ti’ nd, ndzyṳ
muyndzṳ̤̌’ i they serve a meal that he eats with his
brother, but he claims all for himself and eats
it alone; §

dàṅdàṅ, n. drum, arm-drum, used for anga-dance (ndàṅndàṅ)
daṅgà, n. feast, dance
dàṅg̯, v. also: dàṅṳ retain, spread out; § ďṅ, daṅṳdaṅṳ, ṅgàṅ-daṅṳ

dě (ṅgàṅ), v. also: lě ṅgàṅ slander, backbite;
i d m̤̯̌ ṅgàṅ ni tù a he slandered me.

dibdib, interj. good graciousi the deuce the dickensi
dibdib, à Iǎ’ ndǎ ni ko̤, ù làb a e? the deucel ow
is it, what’s the reason for slapping me?

dě̌, n. pl. grandfather; bàdǎ mou̯̤̍ my grandfathers; bàď ù
your grandfathers; bàdǎ yo̤’ our grandfathers ;
děǎ ni mfuṅ bon bon bi, bi bṳ̯mbàṅ n; bàn bi, à yγ̤̌ ni
bon, bàn bi, bi bu̍wi, i ni mfuṅ yab ni bu̯ndzàd bi the
grandfather calls his son’s childien, the boys, his children;
whereas the female ones he calls his’ grandchildren”.

dòǎduṳṅa, n. dysentery; § ntso̤bsi

doɑ̌mbod, n. pl. younger brother of the grandfather

n. pl. bàďṅguka̯d elder brother of the grandfather

dòg, n. fight

doɑ̌ûg, v. push, box, butt, beat with a closed fist; i kà dog a titi
he boxed me severely; by aà nsun kà dogni, n’ dòg i,

mà’ i masi and ny friend were beating each other ;
I pushed him and knocked him down.

 

 

“e

dògni, v. butt each other;
bàmfoṅ ni ndogni the cattle butt each other

dogtà, n. doctor, physician
doli, v. also: dù̀ii eye, watch

do̤ṅu̯, v. betray, lead astray, sneak away, shirk;
tsa’, mà ndoṅṳ na, m’vu tam bo̤ do not lead me
astray, so that I do not fall into a pit; § futi, fùbuy,
vaṅu

dobg, v. fight; mà ta̤m ṅkòd = mà tam dǎg start a fight

dù, n. bee, honey; adàù kud ni tṳ̯ bees hang on the tvree;
§ ńoṅdù, ṅkà’ dù, kǎmdù, kemdù, kàdù, toṅdù

dù màrṅka’, n. wild honey

dù̌mǎ, n. cassava; §

dùma, n. callular shirt, bodice; § singlet

dumnàù, n. pl. of ndumnù important, main matters

dumti, v. restore, renew, repair; incite, instigate, spur,
get going:
i kà dumti nù sùn yab he renewed the friendship;
i dumti fà’ ṅgâ, à t’̯n he started the work with vigour;
bo dumti bùn ma (ìgòṅ he instigated the people in
the town;
fad b dumti i ṅgâ, i yo wu’ those brothers urged
him to go there;
i dumti nù mb bùn he incited the people; § ko’,
kòni

dumu̯, n. moth, vermin (eating dried meat or fish) ;
ṅ’kà dza’ ni ńàm, ntsi’, dumuṳ̯ kwa̤d I dried meat. and
stored it, the vermin ate ist;
dum ni ṅkwa̤d bo̤ nìàm dzumu, tk ṅkwa̤d yi bo̤ nm mf
vermin eats dried meat, worms eat fresh meat; § tid

dn, v. rear, make obedient, get used or accustomed to;
bo kà din a ni ṅgoòṅ no ’ṳ̯̀ bàba bò me’ I was brought
up in all the customs of our fathers;
à bòṅ, ù mbùm ù ni nɑ̌ it is good that you
get accustomed to the matter;

 

 

26

bo kà dn bon bab ni nù ṅgwin they have accustomed the
children to dried sweet potatoes, bananas; § mili, mini

du’; n: spinal column, backbone, waist; i kà vu, du’ i
he fell and dislocated his waist.

du v: disgust, avert

dù’ li, v. be stale, insipid, tasteless ;
ndàù’ mi ni ndu’ lidù’ li his palmwine tastes watery;
à dàù’li = à dìlidù’li it tastes stale.

dù’ lidù’ li, adj. tasteless, saltless;
kědzy le ľ̤̯m e? à ľ̤m bo̤ dù’lidù’li coes the food taste?
it tastes stale, unsalted.

du’ ṅgùm , n. the main beam, a roof truss, the level ground beam
of the roof structure

du’ nmìàmbàwuka̤d, n. part of the back of a slain animal which
is given to the old man who had hit the animal as
the third person or who only took part; § ko̤nti

dù’ ti, v. teach, inform, lecture ;
bo kǎ ndù’ ti Mose ni ṅgoòṅ dzi’ti bà-Egypto me’ they
taught Moses all the wisdom of the Egyptians;
b̤̍ṅkuṳ̯ ni ndù’ti nù ndzamuyṳ the boys learn a lot of
things; § nù; ṅgàṅ-na’ ti nù

dɑ̌’tsuṳṅni the lowest part of the banana stem.
(it is a moving target for spear throwing; when it is
rolling down a slope, it is called mgmbad or mybad)

dù’ n v: let somebody wait (despite being called) ; shirk, loiter ,
hesitate;
ù dù’uṳ̯ yù ti, dzà’ ̯ yù’ ou are loitering, hurry up
i ku’ ṅgǒ̤û mb?’ ù I’ ndù’uṳ̯ yù titin a he went again,
because you let him wait too long; bo dùṳ̯ yab ti they
hesitate very much.

duṳli, v. have no good taste, be sweetish;
dli: ù bǒ̤ nnṳṅ sugar madz tea, a ti mà nď̤m bo,
à bo d̤lidṳ̯li if you put sugar in tea and it is not
sweet, it is sweetly; § do’ i, ndo̤Blikad,

d̯̀§li, v. also: do̤i eye, watch; i dṳ̤li a ni mi’ mbyṳ̯kad
he eyed me with suspicion; ma ndg§̤li ṅgàṅkṳfanù bo̤
do not eye an innocent person.

duṅa, n.

duṅsoγà, n.

du̯’ , n.

du’, v.

d’ l, v.

du’

f
cl

z

dza, adv.

dzab, n.

dzab, v.

spear; same as ko

Voma-spear (with four edges, narrow point and
barbed hook).

poison, poisonous medicine;
dy ńò’ ti bùn lethal poison for man

poison; bo mà mmà’ ti ň mà d’ bùn boo̤ they
do not abandon to poison people.

wind, twist (a string, creepers, climbers, willow ) ;
ba mu̍ lǐn mà ṅk̤̤̍ my father can make a rope;
§ azwen,

toil, tire o.s. out, drudge;
i ni nd̤’ li ni fà’ le mè, a tsa mbo he is tiring
himself too much in that task; § yg’li

(better: lu̯’ ) moving about (of smoke in the house) ;
ndzindzimu’ ni ndy’gṳ̯̌ ma ndàb smooke is hanging
in the room.

together bo ntsàbti bò boà yi dza they blasphemed
us, including him;

ṅgwi à bi’ni mà bàn a boaà bonntsi dza my vwife began
to hate me together with the orphans;

bo ten dzadzàdza they ran together at the same speed.

pour hot water (on tea, vegetables)

1. skim off; dzǎ tù i, mfa mṳ̀, n’dzu’ti skim off the
surface that I may taste it (palmwine) .

2. catch s.th. which is thrown towards you;

i 1Iǎ’ mmǎ’ iṅkab, n’adzà, ṅgǒ̤û ndzun ndù’ ma

he threw the money, I caught it and went to buy

my wine with it.

3. dzǎ (ṅgu’), v. honour (for some heroic deed) ;

mfàn dzǎ i ni ṅgu’ the chief honoured him with a
present; kaum le kà sńuṅ mboṅka̤d, bo dza i ni ṅgob

the juju danced well and was honoured with a chicken.

clue; ball (of wool, hair, soft things)
pick up, leave behind, put down;

bo ku bab, k̯̍̀ dzab mon bo̤ they died without
leaving a child behind; j csi’

 

 

on:

dzab (naṅ), v. spy, lay in wait for a person (with good or bad
intention); lay hands on;
ù dzab naṅ a mbi’ ko̤ e?’ why do you lay in wait
for me? § nan
mà dzab bo nd mùn to lay hands on a person;
bà dzab narṅ mbi’ γǎṅṅkòndum watch the enemy.

dzab, v. store, deposit, keep; § cs’

dzǎb, v. hide, conceal; ù dzǎo y’, nsuṅ yǎ you hide your
sins and punish me because of mine.

dzàbdzàbtu n. at the narrow end of a carpet, cloth, etc.
dzǎd, v. persuade
dzǎdṅgàm, v. slander, evil report; be unimportant;

à k̤̍ mbo bo̤, à bo ndzǎdṅgàm int is not
an important story, it is an evil report.

PB

dzàdti v. pour out; § dzàci
dzàgli, v. tear, be torn

dzàγu̯dzaù̯ adv. onom. very (full, hot, noisy) ,
à tǎn meè dzayγouṳ̯dzayo̤̍ it is extremely hot;
à it is full to the brim,
bo ni ti, a tfsu mè dz. they shake the
rattle so that it rattles; § davṅpṳdaṅ̤

dzam, v. be or become plenty; ;
ntsi à dzam làm ti this water has many depths; l
bǎṅnilùm bǎṅ ni ndib kě dzam a the good weather-
man is there, when there are many things;
dzam mbo (̇gàṅ-ko̤̍ṅkimbo (Pr.) the man without
fingernails has many gourd-seeds , but cannot crack
them. e may have many things, but he lacks the intel-
ligence to make any use of them. § ndzamuy, ndzamka̤d j

dzama, n. majority, most;
dzama bàùn ma (̇gòdṅ le most people of that town;
dzama fa̤d bò most of our brothers;
dzama bàùn sisi most or the majority of the black p.;
dzama yin most of you

dzamdzam, n. teree sp. resistant to fire (found in the steppe)

dzàmin, n. meal of roasted corn and groundnuts mixed together;
a provision for a journey;

 

 

o

à bo̤ mbo̤ ni kaṅsà’, ndib ńùm ta mboṅka̤d a, ù tob
dzàmh ni; ntsi mfo when it is midday and the sun is
shining you mix the corn and groundnut pap with
cool water;

dzàmin bo̤ mbiyaṅ bo ṅgwàfṳd, bo kan, ndo̤m mandàùn
wo, à t’ mà tob ma ntsi, nno zamin consists of
groundnuts and maize which are roasted and ground
on a stone, then it is mixed with water and drunk.

dzǎn, v. let someone or something alone, leave undisturbed,
give a chance;
dzǎn mu̍ṅgwi (fig) woo a woman, make sure that
noone approaches her until the suitor will marry her;
dzǎn mon tet a child enjoy the mother s milk, let
it undisturbed by an early pregnancy (not before
2-3 years);
dzǎn ty ṅko’ tet the little tree grow (before
transplanting ist);
dzǎn let the hair grow; § kwi’, ndzàndzǎn

dzandzàn, v. lay down on the back; be exposed ;
m’ vǐ̌ ma ntsi dzandzàn I fell backward into the water;
i ně̌ṅ masi dzandzàn hae lies on his back.

dzǎndzì o. interj. salutation, response to bandzi (replying: bim = okay)

dzaṅ, n. (a-ba) disease, sickness, pain;
bo dzǎd dzàn i ṅgâ, dzaṅ γo̤ màndzi ṅgṳ ma (̇goòṅ ṅguṳ
they curse his disease that it should go the big road
to hell;
dzàṅ yab tohaeir disease, their pain;
dzaṅ simnì; ndu màùn le the disease is too much for
this man; § sonti dzann

dzaṅ, v. be sick, be hungry, have pain, ache, be home-sick ;
Mary ndzarṅ k6ě bùṅku̯ Mary suffers from pleurisy or
pneumonia or inflammation of the glands;
ndzi y̤’ ndzaṅ yin you long for us, you are homesick
for us; ;
nù le dzaṅ u e? k dzaṅ a bo̤ mṳ̤̍ e?’ does it vex you?
how cauld it not?
ndzi; ni ndzaṅ a I am hungry.

dzǎṅ ndṳ̀, v. split young raphia ribs; § nd
dzàṅ, v. repent, be sorry, revoke;

dzaṅba̤n, v. dance at a certain rhythm, gracefully

 

dzaṅdzaṅ, n. ;

dzaṅdzaṅ, n. also: ndzaṅdzaṅ tree sp.;
dzaṅdzaṅ bo̤ mǒǎ̌’ mbom t ni mfù mi ṅko̤’ ṅko̤’, à fa
ts̤̍tsṳ̯ṅ mb coffee ke ni mfa mimi’ sǎ
Pzangdzang is a kind of tree with small leaves; it
provides shade for the coffee and also drops dew.

dzǎṅgwà, n. former dance of wailing women at funerals
dzaṅlì, n. sleeping sickness

dzǎṅmàn, v. boast, brag, triumph, esp. when in a war the palace of
the eneny is burned; § tsu dzǎṅmàn

dzaṅni, v. feel pain, ache;
ndzoṅṅgwèn mà ni ndzaṅni bo̤ (Pr.) the thorn of
vanity does not pain; for the sake of vanity one gladly
suffers pain;
à ni ndzaṅni ndàṅlǎṅ, mbùdb̤d ti mṳ̀ ni ndzaṅni bo̤
vengeance pains more than the evil which has been
inflicted first;
nù’ ṅkò’̤kà’ ṳ̯ dzaṅni ntsǎ i m̀̍dbd () vengeance is
worse than attack (the beginning).

dzaṅtuṅùà, n. moonstruck

dzàti, v. shorten, curtail, cut (hedge, hair); catch;
bo adzàti tù i they cut his hair;
mù ni mventi ńìmlob, ni ndzàti ndznhdzi I pick up worms
and catch flies; § v̇go̤

 

dzàti, v. also: dzàdti pour out, spread, spray, scatter , sprinkle;
bo dzàti ntsi ma laṅndab they sprayed water on the
house-floor;
bo dzàti ṅgo̤̍ ma laṅndab they scattered grass on the
house-floor; § ndzà tidzà’ ti, mi ti

dž̤m, v. also: dza̤̯gn bear fruit, bear ;
le dzâ̤̍m ntàm mi tene tree bearcrs its fruits;
yò tu dzoòm le dzǎ̤m lǐm o ti that plum-tree bears
plenty of fruit this year.

dz̀mti, v. repeat, § bi’ ci

dzà̯mu̯, v. also: dzàmmu̯, go round, surround, line, wainscot ;
bà-Israel kà dz̤̀my ṅǧṅ eriko ntsu’mvi kwàtad the
Israelites went round jericho seven days;
bo kà bu’ti kuṅkàn le ni gold, ndz̤mṳ̯ they gilded the

 

 

dza’ , v.

dza’ ni, v.

dza’ ti, v.

dza’ ̯, n.

dzà’ ṳ̯, v:

dza̤d, n.

dza̤d, v.

L n
ark of the Govenant; § ypo̤’ mu

pass by, pass over, transgress ;

à bǒṅ mṳ̀ě, ndza’ mbà it is exceedingly good;

ndzà’ dza’ m(̤̍ the time has passed, it is too late;
§ 1ǎ, nd̤

dry, spread out; yawn;
i ni ndzy, ni ndza’ni hae eats and yawns (.) = he is
insatiable; § feni, babli

pass over s.th. without touching it;

mà dza’ ti k ṅgwi mùn = mà dza’tci tundzi mùn seduce
the wife of someone;

or: mà màùn = i ť̤m Ǐ̤ ’ tsi bo (ṅgwi m̌̌’
màùn seduce;

mà dza’ ti kɑǐ m màùn = mà ť̤m tsi bo ṅgwi màùn, ji,
mon kǎ mbscd a -= a husband or s.o. else sleeping

with a wife whose child is not yet two years old.

ease, relief, facility ;

ndib màùṅgwi b’ ni fà’ mfi a, i wàd so masi mè tswà ,
nsuṅ ṅgâ, Nsi ko̤ kund, mfa mu§̯̀ dzà ̯̌ when a woman
starts a new farm, she strikes the hoe into the soil
and says: May the earth take the heaviness and make

it easy for me.’

be light, be swift, easy to do;
dzà’ ṳ yù, nto hurry up and come; dzà g’ yù ’ be quick
n’dzà’u’̯ yà I relieved myself (rinate, fart, break wind).

smell, scent, fragrance;
dza̤d b̌ṅ its scent is pleasant;
dza̤d mfo’tika̯d pleasant air, pleasant scent

have enough, have ones fill;
n’dza̤d mg̤̍ ndza’ mbà I have more than enough.

dž̤m, v. also: džm boear fPruit

dza̤n, n. pl. bàdza̤1 a barren woman

džn, adj.

džn, v.

barren of women; i mu̯̍ngwi she is a barren woman.

also: dzěn; let have, cede, give up, throw down;

i kà dž̤n ṅkab mb mu̯̍ he threw (in anger) the
money at me;

bo dž̤h mbùm yàb they gave themselves up (iin a fit
of despondancy).

 

 

dzeb, v.

dzebti, v.

- ss:

pull out, peel, drop off, weed;
bo dzeb they weed the grass among the corn;
§ kgyb,

loosen, hoe, cover;

ṅ’kà y̤̌ ma wn, mb’ ni mà dzebti tsoṅni ṅgo̤ (or:
γàlàṅ weeds) ni so, ni nnebti ṅgoṅfà’ mṳ̯̌ I vent to
the field and started to uproot the grass to make a
bed with it;

i kǎ mprint ṅwà’ni;, mu̯ ndzebti, ni ntsi’ he printed the
paper, I took the leaves and put them asicde;

ṅ’kà sàǎṅ mǒ’ ndab, ni ndzebcti bricks, ni mfa mbò m̌’
màn, i ntsi’ masi I tore down the house and took the
bricks and gave them to another man and he put them
down.

dzěvyàn, n. joke, jest, mock, or fig. talk

dzen, n. also: tsen ma dzen ntsǐndab in front of the house; § tsen

dzen, v.

dzen, n.

melt, become iquid, shine, glitter;

tṳ̯n ni ndzen iron is melting, but: bo dzoli t’ṳn they
melt iron;

à dzen me fíâèṅ it is very shiny;

ṅgùb màùn le dzen the skin of this man is shiny (with
oi); § ndzenka̤d

cork, stopper, § dzè’ ni, paṅni

dzerṅmbad , n. hill

dze’, n.

dzè’ ni, n.

dzè’ ni, v.

longish cup (neck of calabash)
pot or stopper for bottle, but not a lid

breathe, plug

dzè’ nì, n. pl. bàdzè’ nì (a-ma) spirit;

dzè’ ni a ny breath
rub, annoint; § sati
tree sp. (poisonous, esp. it’s bark, often used)

know, understand, be capable ;

i dzi ts̤̍ṅni nù le he knows the cause of it;

i dzi mà b’ he knows how to perforate
palmribs ;

n’dzi ni ko̤, mbo̤ ṅ’ kà sw masi ṅkùṅ (.) if I had

db P Pr to t; amor

men

odo me oo Ta

 

 

dzi, adv

dzi, v.

dzi;:v.

dz, n.

dz, n.

v:

known, I would have gone down before;
i dzi nɑ mùn le he knows the matter of the man; § fin

after, then (only used, when s.th. new will be said)

kam à bi, ù dzi mi (Pr.) think before you act.

m’meè’ti yò fà’ ṅkuṅ, ndzi to I shall finish this job first
then come; § f(kuṅ

continue
dzi la go oni

change, transform (into an animal or spirit) ;
i dzi ṅg̤̍ he changed into a leopard; § ṅgaàṅdzi,
ṅgàṅsà, sà

beginning; dz lo̤’ mfi start of a new line’place; § ntsu’dzi

inside, inner part;

dznbaṅ inside of a boat; dzhdab inside of a house,
also: possessions; dz nda i his entire possessions;
dzǐ ndzù’ inside of the compound;

mà koṅti dzǐ mbaṅ to scrape or clean the pot;

§ maaz’

be bitter, disagreeable ;

à ti it is very bitter; yo ṅwà’ni le dzǐ u dzǐ e?
Is this letter disagreeable to you?

dzǐ tso̤’ a kind of bitter grass;

begin, start;

dzǐ l̤’ mfi begin a nev line (in the exercise book);

i dzǐ mà fǐ’ fà’ he started to work;

ndzi; dž mà dzaṅ i the hunger begins to trouble him;
§ bn’ni, bd, bǎṅ

dzib, adj. also: tsib very duiet;

v.

dzǐdku̯kaṅ,

dzìdzì, adv.

à t̤’ mè dzib it is stockstill, quite hushed ; § poṅ

go, happen, take place; dzid, ṅgǒ̤ sṳsṳ move forward;

i lǐh mà dzd e? may he go, can he go?

bo kǎ ndzid kù ńin they went together;

i bi’ ni mà to’ ti mboò bo ndzo̤̍ nù le kà dzǐd a he began
to explain how the matter had taken place;

§ azikad, dzini

n. a handicapped

also: dziddzìd only, alone, merely,
i bo̤ yǐ fà’ dzidzi he only knows his work.

 

 

dzǐûàb, n.
dzaṅ, n.

dzìli, n.

dzim, v.

dzim, v.

dzimti, v.

toilet, ..

parlour, dining room and fireside room for men; § tali
totality, sum; sun a ṅgâ, yo daili ṅkab, bi kà fun Iṳ’ fà’
le mṳ̯̌ a e’? tell me, is that the total amount you
have bought the farm with?

i γâ “ṅ̀, a dzili i ’ he said es, it is’

dry up, evaporate; ntsi le dzim the water has evaporated.

rise, resurrect;
i la’ dzim ni vu he umill rise from death ; § dzi’muy

rise, wake up

also: Pzǐǔmbu̯fûṅ big market day in Bali

dzindzin, adv. only, alone; pure unadulterated;

dzini, v.

dzini, v.

dzìti, v.

dzitì, n.

diti; v.

dziti, adv.

dż’ sv.

à kg’ mbo̤ fù ma boàm i dzindzin there was only
medicine in his belly’’ = he was full of medicine;
boòm i bo̤̍ bàdemàn dzindzin he was full of demons;
§ azidzi ;

also: dzìdni crawl, grapple, creep, go about;
§ kani,

disagree, defy, be sulky, look maliciously;
bi i nf’ ndzini you (pl.) = you and he disagree.

begin; à kaà dziti i bo̤ ni mfo̤ with him it began as
a fever; § dž̤ bi’ ni, bd

statutes, decree, order;
bimo’ dziti yab ka wu’ ndzamuṳṳ teohey still have
many other statutes.

avoid, celebrate, observe, keep (rules);

bi ni ndziti ntsu’mvi boà ṅt you observe certain
days and months;

dziti ntṳ̯’ observe rules, commandmaents; § tsobti

also: dziti hereafter, thereupon, then, after ;
i tsu bub, ndzitǐ ṅko’ ku̯tṳ hae said so and then
ascended.

sit, remain, spend, pass ;
i dzi’ bi k̯ndzù ’ he spent the day at home.

node Bot nt

(omen mm; ns

 

dzi ; v:

dzǐ’, v.

daf u:

dzǐ’ kù̍ṅ, v.

dzi’ mu, v.

dzi’ ni, v.

dzì’ ti, v.

dzì’ Ei, v.

dzì’ tì, n.

dzì’tì, n.

= o :

do s.th. continuously or with emphasis ;
ù ni ndzi’, ni nsuṅ ṅgâ you say continously that ...

bow, oppress, belabour; bo dz màùn le they oppress .
him; bo daz’ ntuṅkù’mab masi they kneel down.

ram in, stand up for, insist;

i dzǐ’ tṳ masi he rams in poles;

mà ṅka’ put in sticks for a fence;

i dz’ kàù i n; nù le he insists on that matter;
mu̍ ni mbùm à mommoòm mb; bin I stood
up for you in vain.

shout, cry, weep continuously, call;
ko̤̍ṅ i ’ call himi
ṅ kà ko̤ṅ mbo i I cried to him.

raise (from death); § dzim
sit quiet or sad; § tsi’, tsi

end, cease, finish;
b ṅkiti ndzo̤ yab kà dzi’ti a consider the
end of their life.

be prudent, wise, careful; warn, admonish, beware of;
à b̌̇ wù sě ndzi’ti ndǐ i beware of him yourself;
dzi’ti, ma ndze bub bo̤ be careful, don’t do that;

bi dzi’ ti, kǎ bòn ba, no dzǎm ma y’ ti be careful
children, there are many snakes here;

ti ṅgâ, ù ma ṅkǒd yoò fù bo̤ be careful, do not
touch that charm.

avoidance (e.g. totem); § azici

wisdom, intelligence, knowledge, advice;
m’fa dzi’ti mbò o ṅgâ, ù dzun gold mb mu

: I advise you to buy gold from me;

bn ṅgo̤’ kad dzi ti yab bo ni bo the people are
envious of their knowledge.

rub (with oil)

melt, smaelt (intr.)

melt (r.), purify, found, coat ;

mà dzòli tṳ̯n mà mu’ to melt iron in fire ;

ù bǒ̤ nt’ ndù’, ù dzòli ni ntsu’ mvi ited ke ik wà,
ndzi bàd when you tap palmwine, you clean the

 

 

=̌:
hole 3 or (t. times before you put it into the calabash.

dzòm, n. plum teree (longish blue fruit), the pulp of the fruit
is used.
ṅgandzòm bo̤ mǎ’ bi ndzikad, bo ni ṅkwa̤d a, à
ni ndo’ ma kàòb tohe plum feruit is a kind of bitter
kola, which is chewed; (it grows in the feorest;
the juice serves to glue broken calabashes , the leaves
are used to dye fibres of raphia leaves; the wood
serves as firewood or timber; worms co nsct eat it).

dzɑm, v. saucrse s.o. or others, often in connection with the
oracle;
i dzǎm mbùm i hae curses himself (if the accusation
is true);
mà ntso̤b to swear by the charm or fetish.

dzɑǔm b̀d, v. curse the war, finish it; check the war;
bo b̤̌ mbi bà̤̯d, bo ti kṳ̍ ntaṅ kubùn bo (Pr.)
when they finish the war, they do not count the
dead. (one does not count the injustice suffered,
otherwise there will never be peeace)
m’ v̌ bd ni; dzoǎm b̤̀d (Pr.) I still fell in war
at a time when peace was nesgotiated (l still suffered
loss, although the matter was being settled).

G vo sing; sing often;
bi džb ntsi mfi’ sing a new songli

dzòbtiṅgwèn, v. tell tales or stories; § rṅg wen, tud

dzòd, n. noise, bustle, fame, reputation ;
dzod i yu’ni ma le me’ his fame spread
throughout the country.

dzd, v. make a nmoise, deride, mock, hiss off, glow ;
bo kà dzòod i dzǎd they hissed him off moisily;
mbǎṅ dzǎd mṳ̤̍ the pot is making a nmoise; it is boiling;
tṳ̯n dzǎd the iron is red-hot (to be forged).

dzoṅ, n. a funnel

dzoṅfùndìkàṅ, n. small funnel to fill gunpowder into a gun

n. young cock

dzòṅni, n. shouting, rage, clamour ;

dzoṅni tum a great clamour arises.

 

2 :

dzòṅni, v. speak or shout out of ansger or joy, rage;
l̤’ ni ndzòn̍ni the place is roaring with voices;
ntsi vava ni ndzoòṅ̍ni falling water is roaring.

do, n. crowd ;
i bi yu’ ň esu, nsani, bùn ntsǎ mandž̤̯m i
when he heard the news about jesus, he separated
himself from the crowd and they followed him. § madzo ’

dzo y: besmear, rub ;

i kà dzo’ mbàùm j ni; màn ke titòb he besmeared
himself with dirt or mud.

dzo’ li, v. do superficially ;

bo dzo li ndab they plastered the outside of the house
superficially.

dzo’li nù, v. twist a case, evade or avoid the answer; § vu ’ni

dzàò’ tà, n. big locust (with thorns at the lower leg and at the
neck, a kind of goitre)

dzǒ, v. steal, overcome ;
mà dzǒ̤ an to commit a theft ;
li dž̤ i sleep befell him;
i kà dzǒ̤ dzṳm ku̯mvi she became pregnant illegitimately;,
bo kà dzṳ̤̌’ k bi me’ they stole all his things.

dž’mbad , n. a slope

v. warm o.s.; maà dzo̤’ mu’ to warm at the fire;
nm’dzo’ ńùm, mbùm à keti I warmed myself in the sun
and am no longer so stiff, my body is warmed up.

v rob, loot, sack; sweep, wipe, stroke, caress;
dzǒ̤’ nd’ (ṅkǒṅdzi’)’ blow your nose
bo dzǒ̤ ndab they swept the house;
bo dž̤’ tù i they cut his hair;
but also: yγǒ̤ ni ’ndo, ndzǒ̤’ γàṅfom go quickly
and bring the poori

dz’ ti, n. broom

dž̤ u, v clean, sweep, wipe;
ṅgwi i ni ndzǒ̤’ ndab his wife swept the house;
dz̤̀ ti lo̤ṅ le mboòṅka̤d clean the chair well.

dzo̤’ ṳ̯, v. lean on;

kal

n’dzo̤’ṳ̯ kòṅ ma mbènndab I leant the spear on the

 

 

dzo̤’ ni, v.

v.

;

wall; dzò̤̯ ko’taṅ sisa le ma tu ndab lean the long
ladder against the roof of the house.

ascend gradually; lean against;

n dzo̤’ni it ascends gradually ;

i bi y, ndzo̤’ni ni nt̤̀ i he turned and leaned
against his breast; § lǒ̤̯ mugdz̤̀ ni

peel (bark, skin, husk); § dzeb, kyṳb

dzu’ bǎṅ bà’nì, n. sweet potatoes

dzu’ bǎṅ mù̯kali, n. Irish potatoes

dzùbti, v.

skin, peel (potatoes, etc.); § dzb

dzùdzùsaṅ , n. animal which climbs up trees, sguirrel

dzùγu̯, v.

dzum, v.

dzun, v.

dzunti, v.

spread; (og o Ie dzùγyg ti this tree spreads out;
§ ṅgaṅ-dzùyuṳ

dry, be arid, be meacger, be thirsty;
ntà̤̤ a dzum ma am very thirsty;
i γǒ̤ mṳ̍̌ bi, màndz; dzum hae disappeared without
leaving a trace; § nazumpy, yàgsàg

buy, bargain ;

i kà dzun sa’ mbò bo ni ṅkab they bribed the judge.
bo dzun b̤̀d mbò bo ni ṅkab they procured peace
with money ;

bimo’ bùn kà dzun nù mǐ-oma some have bought
oman citizenship ;

mà dzun ntš ṅgònndam to buy the mouth of the
bride = to make her talk by giving presents;

bo dzun tu mùn they ransom a prisoner, emancipate
a slave with money; § ndzundzun

also: dzuntika̯d; buy frequently

joint, knot (in a stalk), connection

tsetse fly; § tsàòṅ

hut, tent (of grass and branches)

gather, meet, rush to someone;

biìimo’ bùn kà waṅni ṅkòd bùn ndzamy (to,

ndzuṅ ma 1lṳ̤’ le, ni ndzo̤ yab some people fought
yesterday, many people came and rushed to their

3:

places and watched them; § esu;

dzuɑṅbo, n. pl. dzɑ̌ṅmbo (a- ma) elbow (joint), yard, wrist;
dzuɑṅbà a; ma; my elbow(s);
ńin one yard;

dzɑ̌ṅkù, n: knee joint

dzɑṅmbùm, n. joint

dzuṅnì, n. sadness, sorrow, affliction, mourning

dzuṅnì, v. be depressed with grief;
mo’ nimbàṅ yo’ kà ku niṅkù’, b̤̌ nsobni, ni ndzuṅni
one of our uncles died yesterday, we were sad
and depressed with grief.

dzɑ̌ṅṅgwafuṳ̯d, n. knots in a maize stalk; § ṡg wàfṳd

dzɑṅṅuni, n. knots in a sugar cane

dzùṅti, v. join, connect ;
mà dzùṅti mùn to integrate a stranger ; § ṡk̤

dzuṅto’ ti, n. tent; dzu§ȯ̍to’ti ts̤̍ṅninù tent of witness (ev.
dzùṅṳ, v. bring forward repeatedly, state at lenght
dzu’ , n. yam

du, n. tree sp. (with very broad leaves)

dž’ , v. work in water;
mà dzɑ̤’ bǎǐṅ row a boat; maà nsu to scoop
the water in order to catch fish;
mà ntsi to scoop water from a leaking boat.

, v. itch; mban ni ndzɑ̌’ a tohe rash is itching me.
dzɑ̌’ , v. be lascivious, wanton; §

dzu’ko’tuṳ̯, n. yam sp. ( with climbers); its leaves are
called kwada.

dzu’ lu’ , n. yam sp. (small kind with ”hairs’’). In Moghamo the
first dzuw’lo’ is sacrified to the bà-ńikòb before people
can eat it: bùn ma Mognhhamo mà nd mà dzṳ dzu
kau̍ bo̤ ṅgâ, bo kà̯̀ ti bańikàòb bo̤; bo ni ndo’ dzu lo’
nnaṅ ma Ilṳ̤̌’ ńikòb, mfa mò’ mbò ńikòb, ndzṳ mò

’

 

 

dzu’ mu̯, v.

dzu’ ṅgùm,

dzṳ, v.

dzuṳṳfaṅgaṅ,

dzṳm, n.

dzuṳ̯ni, v.

dzṳmni, v.
dzṳ n.

n.

3;

they take yam and cook it at the holy place, give some
to god and eat some.

eat someone out of house and home, make meacger,
make dry; § adzum
bo dzu mg na = bo tǎn a they eat too much, they
impoverish me.

n. yam sp. (arge kind)

eat, inherit, enjoy, celebrate, take advantage,

receive (honour), have fellowship with one another;

i dzṳ, ku̍̀ dza̤d he is insatiable;

màùn le tǎ’ mà dzy tfuγàb iba he wants to make
profit from both sides;

n’ tǎ’ mà dzy u miyà I wact to tacke a little
advantage of you;

mà dzy ntsu’ celebrate a feast-day, keep it;

mà dzṳ ntùntù’ overeat, eat too much;

i kà dzg̤̤̍ ba i = i kà az ľ̤ṅ ba i = i kà dzy
ndâ ba i he inherited the house;

i kà dzṳ̯ mfòn he became chief ;

mà dzy rṅgòṅ enjoy or indulge in life;

mà dzṳ mvi le long;

i dzṳ my sa’ le he won the lawe-suit;

ti ndzuy i bo̤ ni fṳ̯ko̤b si’sà (Pr.) continuously eat

with him with a long spoon (keep him at a distance)
mby§̤̌̇ ni ndzṳ̯ the rain is grazing’’, (when the clouds
are threatening and the rain has not yet fallen) ;

i dzy rṅgu’ he is honoured as a hero;

i dzṳ kědzuṳ ntsintsi he ate the meal without greens;
ù bǒ̤ mbo̤ k̤ kd, ù dzǒ̤ dzṳ e? If you do not work,
will you have to eat? § kěǎdzy, ndzṳ̤’ (mon)

v. eat too much;
bo dz, à là bòm yab teoaey eat, it is ’passing’’ their

stomach = dà2;faṅgaṅ

pregnancy; i ni she is pregnant
§ 1ǎ’, tsṳm

have friendly communication, have fellowship at table;
i ni ndzṳṳ̯ni ti he takes injustice in his stride.

meddle unduly into s.th.
abandonment; dz;ṳṳ’ we a fesal lonely.

head of bed, usually dark; also: foot-end, where a

 

 

v.

dzwà’ , v.

dzwěǎà, v.
dzwen, v.

dzwèti, v.

dzwili, v.

frame ds attached.
feed, give food; also: mà fa kěèdzṳ; § ndzy’

rip off, cut open (fruits), so that the juice
can flow out ;

sneak; § kwo̤ti, ńa ’
twist, twine; § ba’, sab, dy’, nswi’ dzwendzwen, ṙk̤

sneak past (in order not to be seen);

ṅgo̤̍ ni ndzweti ma ṅgò, ni ńńa’ mbi a leopard

is sneaking through the grass to catch a goat;

bo dzweti bab (ńinńin they sneaked away one after
the other.

be sickly, be weak, be exhausted, esp. through
advanced pregnancy ;

mbùm à kà dzwili nì̇kù’, à tsà mbo yesterday my
body was extremely weak; § ndzwildz wili, ndzwilikad

dzỳ , interj. also: zyṳ̯̀, z̤̀ kind of greeting to sub-chief;

E

e, interr.

esi, interj.

x

the reply is: , ù la’ndi e? reply to this: nǎ’

particle at the end of a question (raised intonation);
ù to e? are you coming? d (n ni ko e?’ how do
you know?

exclamation of contempt, of sadness, of repugnance;
esi, mà’ti a, n’tsi leave ne alonel

 

 

fa, v. give, do s.th. for someone;
bo fa bǒṅnù mb màùùn le they did good to that
man, they released him; ;
bo fa by’nù mbàò mfa̤d i le they condemned the brother;
nèbti bàńikòb mfa b̤’, bo ṅko̤sṳ yṳ’ make gods for us
who go ahead of us, who lead us;
bi tàǐ’ mà bom ilà’ mbom ndab fa e? what kind of
house do you want to build for me?
i ni mfa ndo be runs fast, he escapes;
i kà fa ndzòm be gave’ a curse;
i fa he shot, he fired; § ndo

fǎb, v. fold, press together;
by i γo̤ ma ṅg wan, i fǎb ntsàù i, kṳ̍ ko̤’ bi bo̤
I go with him to the field, he grits his teeth
and does not reply.

fǎb lù̯m, v. put out tongue in death (like cows, goats, etc.)
fàbli, v. ceceive, cheat; § ṅgàṅfàbli
fǎb suṅ, v. tall a lie;

ù bǒ̤ mfǎb suṅ nntu mfad àù, à ti boòṅ bo if you

tell a lie about your brother, it is not good; § ba’ni
fǎbsuṅ, n. lie; § (̇gaṅfbsuṅ
fab; fold together (also hands), make a loop;

fàbti mbo cross arms;

fàbti nsimbo (feold fingers

fàbti nsòṅ, v. grit the teeth, make an effort in pulling s.th.;
§ mam, nsoòṅ

fad, n. pl. mfad (soss:
à tso ni fad. ǐ mà nd mà ko̤ mo ṅka bo̤ it has
been lost, you will not get it again.

fad; v. be lost; àa fad 1 o

fad, v. squeeze in, jam (into) , be packed, press ;
i fad mon ji ni mbaàn i she carries her child under

her arm; § facti, fani, mfadfad

fadni, v. pass on; § fani

 

fadti, v.
fam, n. pl.

fǎm, v.

famni, v.

fǎnbo, n.

fàni, v.

fàni, v.

fani, v.

fǎnnù, n.

fànti, v.
fàṅ, n.

faṅ, v.

press together; § fati
mfam nalil

also: fàmti; fàmti ndzi fasten the loin cloth (by rolling
it in)

be longer than s. th. else, be ahead, be excellent.,
be perfect ;
à bǒṅ, mfamni very good, perfect

fasten; § fǎm

err, go astray ;

Ferode kà yâ, bo ńn’ tikaàd bon bùṅkuṳ̯ me’, mbi’
ndimoò’ mon le fàn ntso madzo’ bo Faerod ordered
that they should kill all children, for there might
be the said child among them.

miss one’s blow (by which s.o. got hurt), miss ;
Tom kà bi ť̤’mh muytsi, mfǎn. nť̤m jong = fǐnbo
when Tom aimed at the antilope, he failed and
shot ajong.

commit adultery with the wife of the brother
of the chief; crime against the majesty

flow into, pierce through s.th. , do s.th. right
to the end;

san fò le mfàni dig the ditch right to the end;
kw’ màndzi, mfàni ma ya’ clean the road up
to here

also: fadni pass on, spread, press hard on s .o.

for long;

i tsu mbà bo (ìgâ, bo ma mfani l̤̍ṅ ti mbà bùn bo̤

he told them they should not pass on his name;

a ni mfani a bo̤ ni ndù’ I only long for wine; § fad

slip, fault, offence;

bo ni mmika̤d fǎnnù bab bo ni bo they do not
bear a grudge against one another; lit. they
swallow their faults.

fail, sin

roar, rage; § fàṅmbo̤ṅ lightning

fasten the framework of the roof; arch

 

 

 

fǎṅ, v
faṅfàn; n:
fǎṅf̤̯̀d, n.

roar (lion, leopard) , shout at s.o., spit;
Pilatus kù’ mfǎṅ tsu mb bo Pilate shouted
at them again; § fà̇ni

tree sp.
tree sp., (the wood of which is used for carving,

also as timber for native houses);
fě̌ṅf̤d edible caterpillar, living on this tree; § (̇koṅ

fǎṅmbṳ̀ṅ, n. lightning ;

fàṅni, v.

faṅni, v.

faṅni, v.

faṅni, v.

faṅṅgaṅ, n.

fǎṅmbo̤ṅ ṅwà ti flash lightning;
fǎṅmbo̤̍ṅ it flashed;
§ ṡgaṅfǎṅmbò̤ṅ, ṅgàṅtummb§̤̍ṅ, fàṅ

make an effort, work hard; frighten s.o.; § mamni, fǎṅ

alternate as in laying bricks; brickwise;
bo ni mfarṅni wo bi they lay the stones alternately.

simulate, feign; play the hypocrite; § fṳ̯ni

-evade each other ;

bi i faṅnifàṅni you evade oneanother;

also: faṅgaṅ, excess, want of discipline,

want of self-control; dzgfaṅgaṅ, excess in eating;
kùdfaṅgaṅ, excess in work ;

nofaṅgaṅ exacess in drinking; § kefaṅṅgaṅ

faṅṅgùm, n. crosslike braces to keep the inside roof apart

faṅṅgẁ̤n, n. helplessness, lack of counsel;

fàṅti, v.

fàṅṳ̯, v.

faṅṅgw̤̍n dzṳ a l am heaelpless.

fàṅtika̤d tsu shout, make noise, cry, scream

frighten; i ni mfàṅṳ bùn ti he frightens people; § ṡkan

fàṅuṅkan, n. scarecrow, scare ’monkey’

fat;

fati, v.

also: fadti press together, pack tightly ;

bàùn ni ṅkab dzoò lo’ ni to̤ kṳ̤̍ tsi’ ṅgâ, à fati yi bo,
mbi’ à v. bo ni (ṅkuṳ̯ ntsi’ ntanntan people pick plums
from the tree not packing them tightly, as they would
rot, they pack them (loosely.

strip off (dry maize or millet leaves )

::

fati, v. desire, long for, press for;
nt̤̀̍ a ni mfati a bo̤ ni ndibà’ I long for tobacco;
tsu ni mfatifati lost for words; § fad

fati, n, confound, disgrace, expose ;
ma mfati a ni mi’ bùn bo̤ do not expose me in
front of people; i kà fati a ma ntan he disgraced me
at the market; i fati mbi’ i dzǒ̤ yum a he exposed
himself, because he stole something;
màùn bǒ̤ ndzǎ mo yum, yi, à mà (̇kù’ni bo̤ a, i bo̤ fati mṳ̌
if somebody does something which is not sufficient or
in order, he has exposed himself;
m’ fati mu̯̍ I exposed myself = n’ ti we’ ndzi ndù mu̯̍ bo̤
I did not put clothes on; m’ fati yà uiulsgraced
myself; § fṳ̤ei

fatimb̯̀(d, n. (ta-ma) diarrhoea (esp. with children); § kwaà’ kwaà ’

fàbli, v. do s.th. inaccurately ;
fàbli tsu speak indistinctly ;
fàbli fà’ cut corners (in order to finish quickly)

fa, n. farm, field, work in general;
i dzi’ mbàùm i ni fà’ ndzamṳ̯ he works with great
effort; i we fà’ i bo̤ ni tunsimbò mi he works
superficially (lt. with his fingertips); § kwi’, lenfà ,
ndzaǎṅfà’, ṅati, ṅgǒ̤ṳfà’, pobfà’, šṅfà’, wǒṅ

fa also: mâfa’, pl. bonfa’ twins ;
ṅgwi Gwa kà vi fa’ bu̯mbàṅbṳṳmbàṅ, the wife of
Gwa gave birth to twin -boys.

fǎ ; v work, fork, tear, split; à f’ mṳ̍ mboṅka̤d it worked
out well; à ci f’ bo ist did not tear, is tough, reliable;
mo’ bo i fà’ one of its branches broke off;
i dzi mà fǎ’fà’ he starts work.

fǎ’ ba’ndzitenti. n. craft of weaving tents

n: supervision, administration
w’

fǎ’ k’, n. colocasia farm

fǎ’ ku̯̍liu, n. useless work, vain effort
fǎ’ kwàn, n. slave work

fǎ’ mbìyaṅ, n. peanut farm

 

 

fea’nl, n. quarrel, strife ;

fa’ni vù, bo sani a arose and they separated;
bo bini fa’ni they began to quarrel;

bo we i ni fa’ni they caught him in a quarrel.

fa’ni, v. brawl, quarrel;
bo bi’ni mà fa’ni fà’ni they began to quarrel with
one another;
bo fa’ ni boà bo titin they quarrelled with them a lot.

fà’ nt̯̀mtǎ̤̯m n. vork not yet distributed to the women by
the landlord ; collective farm

Fa’ṅg wànńàm, n. a name ; F. mbim ndaoṅ (Pr.) = mo’ mùn kà f’
fà’ ma l ’, nàm dzam ma wu’ a, ńàm dzṳ kě bi me’, i
ti ndoṅ, someone vorked hard on his farm, yet the
animals ate everything , he is not lazy (but has bad luck).

fà’ti, v. split, separate, cause discord

fàt;v. tear off, tear, break ;
fà’ti bo ty (fǎ’) break off branches;
fà ti ṅgob tear a fowl (in witchcraft) = divide a family;
mo’ ṅgod kà azam titi, bo tà’ ṅgob, ntsi masi, ńń̠̌’ i,
mfà’ ti ke nsanti i, yò bà’ lò’ yǎb bà’ti ṅgob, ndzy, ibe’
bà’ là’ yǎb bà ti ṅgob, ndzṳ sě a family grew, they
got a fowl and put it down, they killed it and divided
it; one part of the family took their portion, the other
part took theirs and ate it. This is how they separate
a large family.

fà’tu’ni, n. § (fà ntà̤mtǎm

fa̤d, n. pl. mfad, also: fa̤dfa̤d, brothers, sisters

fali, v. roll; i ni mfali j =i ni mfa̤li mbùm n be rolls himself.
falifalì, adj. confused, absent, ragged

fè, n. pl. of mfeè (cta-ma) feather; feèḟgoòb feathers of a fowvl;
fěèṅgu’ red feather of a bird; sign of an honourable person.

Fě name of girl or boy given to a single baby that follows
twins.

febli, v. chatter; febli tsù chatter, babble; § fe’ni tsù

fed, v. press: n’tǎ’ titi. mfed kṳ̍ yo bo̤ I searched very
hard , turned it upside down without finding it;

fedni, v.

fem, v.

fem, v.

fem, n.

femti, v.

fen, n.

fen, v.

fěn, v.

feni, v.

fenmu’ n.

=62: -

mb̍ṅ kà lo ni mfuńùm, mfed mbobntsa masi, or:
mvoo̤’ti mbobntsa’ nrain fell in the night and ’pressed’
the dust down, or: soaked the dust;

m’ fed tàd le, mbi’ à vìù I ald the pot firmly, lest
it fell;

vu fed i he died of apoplexy; death ’pressed’ him
down.

oppress someone; i fedni is very oppressive.

spray, squirt, splash;

mb̀ṅ fem ma mbènndab rain beats against the

house wall,;

bàmǎṅna fem (ṅgònndam ni buṳ̯ the sisters of the father
of the bridegroom sgquirt the bride with camwood

(from their mouths);

mà fem ntsi saquirt water from the mouth on s o.

bless, spit, squirt; bless by spitting ;

ńikòb fem nti ndu i god has blessed him; that is why
the curse does not stick to him;

i fem mon i hae blessed his child ;

ba fem nti ndǐ mon i father spits’ on his child ,
blesses it;

Formerly the Bali had no oracle; it derived from other
tribes. hen they went to war or on a. journey, the
father poured water on the feet of those going and
wished that they should be blessed (fem, femti), so that
they would not become sick or be killed. For that reason
the courtyard was thoroughly swept and all the doors
were opened.

(ma) blessing or passing on a blessing; § femti
bless, spit;

to, mfemti ni bo à come and bless me in my hand’,
spit into it; § fom

abyss, ravine; § fenmau’, yo̤m

suck, suck off;

i fen mbò mi be licked his hands or fingers;

§ fenti

lift up, annul curse; § fenti

also: fedni being pushed in crowds

hell; § nsibàṅfenti , fen

 

 

d i

fenmu’, v. suck (a sweet fruit); § femti, fen

fènti ndòn, v. iift or annul an imposed curse by a corresponding

feti, v.

fěyùm, n.

fe’, adv.

fe’ ni, v.

f

fi, v:

fifi, n.
fikò, n.
Fili, n.
fimti, v.
fin, v.

fińo, n.

sacrifice; § fěn, ndoòn

press (soil) carefully in a pot; nǎ feti ku’ le madzi mban
mother carefully lays the cocoyam in the pot.

also: mfǎyum unexpected, perhaps not even rightful
gain or profit; maybe a stray sheep or fowl.

there, thither, opposite to yγâ’ here;

n’dà’ ma f?’ 1 come from there;

bi tsi’ fâ’ stand there;

nda i fâ’ his house is down there;
§ ba’, be’, pâ’

burn (grass as long as it is not quite dry) ;

fe’ ni mbùm. singe the body;

mà fe’ni fà’ burn the grass on fallow farm

to prepare it;

fe’ ni fu-ṅk̤̍ndòṅ ni mu’ soften banana leaves (to be
used for wrapping s.th.); ;

fe’ ni tsu chatter non-stop (as crackling sound of
burning grass ); § dza’ ni, febli, tǎn, babli

sweat ;
ndzṳ̤̌’ ni fi a I sweat.

present (as honour);

i fi nàùàm mb ba i he presents the animal to his father;
i fi tù i mb mfàòn fig. he presents his head to the
chief, he submits his life to the chief; §

boil; tad f e? Is it boiling?

ntsi ndonlon mfi tàd bo̤ (Pr.) begged water does not
boil in the pot.

vegetable with small leaves; african spinach

fig; §

proper name of girls

also: femti suck; § fem

sell (also in the sense of betraying); § mfnfi’n

snake (which does not pursue, but waits for its victim

fiti, v.

f.

fi’ ti, v.

in its pit)

appear (pus); mfi fiti ni tso’ pus secretes on
the wound.

cover with soil, fill with soil, bury ;

fǐ’ a the rain soaked me (so that I could
not go on);

ntsi fǐ’ bùn the water covered the people;

u la’ tam a, m’ f’ u you will fall into my trap
and I will bury you; this is a serious threat.

tear from, escape from, deliver;
i fǐ̌’ bò mb yò mvi be has delivered us from this
world; § f’ ’ni, fici

example, model; § Iǎ’ mf

escape, slip;
ked f’ ni mè tswàd the arrow suddenly went off;

N

à 1f’ni mv masi it slipped off and fell to the ground; § fo

begin, compare, imitate, adapt., try;

à f’ ti mà tso̤b it started to sprout;

i fl ’ ti bùn mommom he imitates pagans;

i mà mbi f’ti ndzi ndu i bo̤ he has never put on
clothes; § bini, ti

chief; § mfòn

ditch, furrow;

bo ta̤m tu fò, nnàn ni ntsa’ ṅgâ, mbuṳṅ ma ndǎ w,

nsǐ̌ṅ fà’ bo̤ they covered the furrows on the farm with
soil, so that rain-water cannot pass and wash it

away; § fòmbo§̤̍ṅ, fòkwà̤n, fòtsyṳṅni

path between two ridges on the farm

one who stands in the door; i tsi ma fòyo̤̍ro̤’
he stands in the doorway; § pyoro̤ ; tsuṅ

’

fòkûṅmbṳ̀ṅ, n. water-ditch, also ditch beside the road ;

fom, v.

ṅ’ kà buli fòkûṅmbṳ̍ṅ manṅko̤ṅ nda à (ṅgâ, mbṳṅ ma
mpad nda à bo l have changed the direction of the
ditch by the house, so that the rain can not pelt
against my house.

be mouldy, full of spiderwebs ;
yum àò fom m(̤̍ the thing is mouldy.

 

 

fom, n. carrot

fom, v. be cich, be full;
ntsu à fom I have plenty of fine food;
mboò ma fom uy hands are large, I have
got a good meal.

fòmbad, n. cut between two hills or mountains, saddle;
§ f, mbad

fòmbṳ̀ṅ, n. ditch, gutter; § fòkoṅmbṳ̍ṅ, fò, mbṳṅ

fomṅgam, nu. eighty ; § ifom

fòmu̯suṅ, n. bird sp., king of the birds;

: ṅ’ kà buyṅṳ ma nazù’ a, ndà’ ni mǎlàm mi’,

som a, le bo igâ, i suṅ mbò mu ṅgâ, n’ da’ ni mu
mǎ’ yum ( started from home and forgot my spectacles,
the king of the birds sighed and told me that I had
forgotten something.

fòn, n. dignity of chief, chiefdom; § mfàòn

fon, n. trace, track ;
bo tso’ fon ńàm they follow the trace of the
animal;
i tso’ fon γǎṅba̤d he follows the track of the warrior;
bo san fon they forced their way through grass .

fon, v. become weak, owing to early sexual habits or
unchastity ;
i fon mg̯̍ he has become weak.

fǒn, v. find; § found

fòndz̤̯̀m, n. prince of darkness

fɑǒ§nfòn, n. chiefs; § mfàòn

fònnto’, n. also: mfònnto’ subchief, chiefs responsible to

main chief
n. depression along the spinal chord

Fòńùṅntsù, n. king of beard; name given to ev. Ernst. by the
Bali, because of his long beard; § mfòn

fòtsuṳṅni, n. crease between the buttocks

 

fotu, n. mahogany tree

n. sterility, owing to corpulence;
mûṅgwi vɑ̌̌ fod, mà vi mà (nṅkṳ̯ mbo̤, mbi’ ṅgwa̤ d
tso mg̤̍ ma boòm i a the woman has become sterile
and can no longer bear children, because she has
grown too fat.

fod, v. connect., together with;
ṅgoòṅ bùn me’ la’ lh, fod bṅkṳ boà wauka̤ d
everyone will know, children and old people
together; § mfod

fodmbi, n. castrated he-goat or ram; § bo̤b old he-goat

fodńàm, n. feattened cattle

fògbu̯ûa, n. green, harmless snake

fòloṅṅkà’, n. tree sp. (of the steppe with tough leaves and
edible fruit)

fòlòṅtsṳṅnì , n. coccyx, small triangular bone at the end of human
spinal column

fòm, nu. eight (used when preceding the noun); § ifom
fom, n. poverty; fomrṅkab financially poor
n. fallow farm

fom, v. be poor;
bo fom kě6ě ku̯mvi they lack worldly goods.

fɑǒm, v. roast (in hot ash or fire);
bo f̌m dzu’ bàṅ mà mu’ they roast potatoes on
the fire; § foòmni; foòmti
fom, adj. forsaken, lonely
fom, n. drum, used for danga dance
fɑǎ̌m mu’, v. cover fire with ashes to keep it glowing
fommvi, n. next day; § mfoòmmvi

’famndzù’, n. forsaken compound, desolate compound

fòmni, v. coast in hot ashes;

 

= sǐ =
ù bǒ̤ ntǐ mà az dzòm, ù fòmni ma bumu’ ntònka̤d
if you: want to eat plums, you roast them in hot
ashes; § foòmti

n. devastated town; § ṙgoṅfòm

fòmti, v. also: foòmni or: fɑěm coast in hot ashes

f̌ǒṅ, v. scrape, scratch with nails or teeth; § kamti
fàṅni, v. erase roughly and inaccurately; § ṅku’ mu̯mbaàṅ
fòṅti, v. scratch, scrape off (often);

dzu’ bàṅ ti mà mbi mboṅka̤d bo, ù fonti, ṅkwad
when the potatoe is not properly cooked, you
scrape ist and eat it;

bd a ni ndzu’ , m̤ mfòṅti ni ṅkimi a na arm is
itching, I scratch it with my fingernail.

foti, v. comprise, contain; l

à foti kwà’ nù ndzamuṳ̯ it contains many things. l

fo’ , adv. there; a oo fo’ = ǎ fo’ It is there; § wa’, fe’, j

γâ , be’, ba’
;
- d: o b cod, ;
ù kà’ ni a màè, mbùm à f̤̍ fo you scold me so that.
I feel cold ;

ndzi fo̤ telae cloth is wet;

i fo ni fà’ heis lazy at work;

l̤̍’ fo mè kǒ̤m itis stockstill ;

ù y nù, à fo ti what you do is very ugly;

tsu in fo ti his language is very filthy; § mfokad

fo̤d, v. plunder, steal, search thoroughly;
bo kà fod i they robbed him completely.

fn̤d, v. blow, breathe j

fo̤d, v. cast hollow articles in metal;
bo f̤d tsṳ̤ṅndibà’ they cast tobacco pipes of metal.

fṳdntsù, n. breath of the mouth
fdtika̯d, adv. breezy, fresh
fufòb, n. ghost; § fùfòb

fo̤li, v. spray (with water); § voi

 

folo̤ṅ, n.

ban, drive away ;

mà foli b̤̍’’ drive away evil (by common shouting,
shooting, sacrifices of food, blowing over the back
of the hand (femt’), spitting on a stone and casting
it away).

cap with ear muffs. It is the most beautiful hat of
the king which he wears at the Lela feast;

splendid hat, crown;

yǎ fo̤lo̤ṅ kǎ ni mbaṅ, no, splendid hat is still red =
my father is still alive.

fo̤lo̤ṅ lùṅ, n. crown of life

fulo̤ṅṅkà ,

fo̤m, n.

fo̤mni, v.

fòmu, v.
fo̤nì, n.
fo̤ni, v.
fo̤nti, v.

fo̤ti, v.

fu̍ti, v.

n. teree sp.; § foloṅṅkà’

chalk, white soil

be insatiable;

bi fomni ti you are insatiable (blame);

foomni = ù dzy k̤̀ dza̤d you eat without getting
satisfied.

be unclean, dirty; kuńàm fò̤muy ti the pisg is very dirty.
friendliness, quiet; § fo

be peaceful, cool; § mfo̤nikad

speak evil of a person not present

cool down, rest, relax;
dzaṅ fo̤ti mṳ̍ the sickness eased or abated

also: f̤dti blow; ;
bo f̤ti mu’ they make fire.

fo̤ti kòàn, v. purify a woman after adultry

fon
fo̤ V;
fo’ v

purify ritually, e.g. if a woman has seen Voma by
chance, Voma receives a white fowl and one cesar
(former money) from her, then water is sprinkled
on her with leaves from a tree called woobndzi.

blow, breath on, cool; § mfo’
bewitch; bo fo’ u ndza̤§m mu e? Nave you been

bewitched (being breathed on with medicine) that
you are persecuting me?

 

 

 

fṳ̌â ti, v.

fo’ ti, v.

v.

- gg: -

mà fo’ mùn breathe on s.o. with medicine that he
will do s.th. evil and bring shame on him;

bo fo’ i fo’ they have bewitched him; this is said
when s o. is doing s.th. evil unexpectedly;

bo kà fo’ Nduṅga ni fù, i ba they have bewitched
Nd. with medicine, he is mad,;

m̌’ màùn kà ngṅ fù ni bà i, mfo’ Nd. i ba
somebody put medicine in his hand blevw it on Nda.,
he became mad.

blow on, winnow, fan;

bo kà f̍’ ti ndzù’ they blew away the evil from
the compound; :

bo f̤’ti ṅgwàfṳd they winnowed the corn.

smell agreeably;
à lǎm mfo’ti it has a nice scent.

impose binding obligation (if not fulfilled, a curse
will be the conseguence).

medicine, magic potion;

mu̯ γǒ̤ ko fù kù a mb na I am about to go and get
medicine for my leg from Na;

fù by’ ntsa vu () magic medicine is worse

than death.

fù, n. pl. mfù leaf; f (̇ku̯ndàṅ, fù ṅgo̤̍ bamnama leaf, grass leaf;

mfi t’ṳ̯ tree leaves

fù, n. pl. mfù (a-ma) lesgal fellowship of husband,

fu, adv.

fùbka(d, v.

fùbli, v.

fùbti, v.

said only by another fellow- wife

be white; ndzi à fu the dress of my wife is white;
bo kà mǎ’ ndzi fu they put on white clothes; § fufu

sip hot drink, etc.

go astray; bo kà màndzi they missed the
way; err, fail

go astray often, miss the way

be disobedient; used also as adj.:
fùblimon disobedient child

take small draughts, sip;
bo nèbti tea mb mṳ̍ ni mb’ mbà’, à tòn titi,
mu̯̍ nti’ fubtifùàbti they made tea for me in

- god -
the morning, it was too hot; I just sipped it; § fob
fùbti, v. go astray again and again
fùbu̯, v. lead astray, embarrass s o., confound; i kà ta’ mà y̤̌
ma B tibo̤, bo fùbuṳ ni, i fàn màndzi, ṅgǒ̤ ma Bamenda
he wanted to go to Batibo; they lead him astray, he
missed the way and went to Bamenda; § doṅṳ
fudzu’ bàṅ , n. pl. mfudzu’bàṅ (a-ma) leaves of sweet potatoes
fùfom, n. plant with bright blue flower
fùfàòb, n. also: fṳ̯fòb, fṳ̀̀fòb ghost
fùfɑǔ̌bmàùn ,, n. pl. fùfòbbùn sopirit of diceased

fùfɑ̌byum, n. shadow of s .th.

fufù, n. white field mouse; it is eaten and enters
a new house first ; § mbab

fu fu, adj. white; § tn fufu, fu
fufutu, n. grey hair, old man
fùfṳ̍f̤d, n. medicine against storm

fùyù, n. also: fùkù̯ bag (flower, salt) of European material;
fùyù tsi a bag of salt

fùûmbàn, n. medicine against itching
fùmbàṅ, n. pl. mfùmbàṅ oilpalm leaves, fronds
fùmbòṅ, n. kind of thorn

fùmbwe, n. also: fɑṅmgbe dance of women (in Ve, Bikom,
Bandop, Babanki; name only known to them).

fùmfo̤, n. medicine against fever
fù mfo tika̯̤d, n. good, healing medicine , delicious medicine
fùmfù̯ṅ, n. medicine for wounds

fùmi’, n. medicine for eyes

 

 

fùndìkàṅ, n. gun powder

fùntà̯mta̯m, n. amutet (little leather bags with words of the
in it, made by ausa people); § bon bàm fù

fùntsuṅ, n. pl. mfùntsuṅ (a-ma) grass leaves

fuṅ, v. call, phone, read, consider, look at ;
bo kǎ mfun i ni dza̤n they regarded her as sterile;
màn, i la’ fani l̤̍ṅ Tita a, la’ lùṅ heae calls
on the name of the Lord, will live.

fuṅ mu̯ṅgwi,, v. commit adultery
fuṅ ṅgàm, v. consult the oracle, the earth spider

fɑ̌ṅgommàùn, n. medicine fetched from the field and hung at
the entrance of the decorated palace of the chief.

fuṅmuṳ̀ṅgwi, n. adulterer
fùṅkùndòṅ, n. pl. mfù̌ṅkùndòṅ (a-ma) banana leaf

fuṅpì’ limbo, n. fortune telling, whereby a grass leaf is rubbed
between the palms of the hands to receive the
desired yes” for a planned enterprise.

fuṅti, v. wave; futṅti ni bo wave with hand (to comae) ;
§ kab, miti

fùto’ ntsù, n. appetizing herb (oxalis); §
fùvo̤, n. medicine for skin disease; § vo̤

fù’, n. luck, gain, riches;
fù’ mbàṅ bam () luck, but no bag to collect it;
fù’ ff mfòn he who gains, gives it to the chief
= you will carry water to the river; j
fù’ nadzamuy bo̤ nazo luck brings its responsibilities;
fù’ ndum fù’ ṅgwi i profit or riches of the husband
is his and profit of the wife is hers.

fu, v. be or become vwvhite, bright; foam, ferment;
à fu’ meè pub int is white as snow;
mvi bi’ni mà fu’ it is getting bright, it dawns;
§ ndàù’, fufu

fu’, v. sprout, germinate ;
à fu’ pobpo̤b it germinates sporadically; § po̤bpob

fù’v. be moth- or worm-eaten;
ṅgwàfṳd bo̤ ndo̠’ni ku̯tàṅ titi, à fù’; ... mbiyaṅ, kun;
if the maize is stored in the attic too long, the
weevils eat it; § mfu’

fù v, gain, enrich o.s.;
i fù̌’ mṳ̍̌ ṅkab hae gained money.

fù . strew, scatter, cover with dust;
bo tù yab ni mbobntsa’ they covered their heads
with dust;

ma ndzi ù bo̤ (o not throw dust on your dress ;
bumu’ ni ashes give off dust;

ndu màùn ṅku, i ’ tù i n; mbobntsa’ ke ni
bumu’; yd le bo̤ mà nati mb bàùn ṅgâ, nù mboṅka̤ d

mà mbo̤ mbà i bo; yǐ nù ti i mbyṳkad when a
husband dies, his wife covers her head with dust

or ashes to show the people that good things are

no longer with her; her affairs have become bad

(she suffers); § koòmuy

Fù’kù̯dzṳ, n. a name

fù’mba̤d, n. big dung-beetle

fù’ndzo̤m, n. castle in the air, dreamland (luck)

Fù’dzṳṅkuṅ) n. a name, ss.o. called by this

fù’ni v. be whitish, green or yellowish or greyish

fù’nifu’nì , adj. yellowish, whitish, greyish

fù’ ṅk n. one who carries luck on his back with a
hidden curse which will finally destroy the luck;
ù kě bu kwà’ ndzamz, à boṅ; à bi bo̤ mandza̯ûm,
à bubti me’ = yu le kà bo̤ ma ṅkwa̤̍nndòn
youd carry about a lot of things; it is fine; but
later all shall decay = you carry your luck on your

back with a curse.

fù’ti, v. stir, beat (make it foaming) ; fù’ti tita tsu’ stir
the soup.

fut, n =1sss;
fu’ tu yǎà itis foggy;

fu’ tu lo mǔ̯̤ tosg has lifted; it drizzles.

fu̍fòb, n. short; § fùfòb, f̤fòb

 

fṳ̯̍f̤d, n. wind; § f̤f̤d
fu̯̍fad, n. Bali cloth, open on both sides and tied with a string
fù̯nfùòàb, n. sbort; § fùfòb, f̤fob
fu̯̍kaṅ, n. tree (Bameta: àyaṅi); § (ikȯ f̤kaṅ
f̯tò, n. foto, picture
fṳ̯, v. liken, be like, look as;
à f̯ ndzo̤̍ ndzo̤̍m it was like a dream; l

à f ndzo̤ kristal it was like a crystal; § fṳṳ̯ni

fṳ̌ṳ:v: betray, simulate, cheat, feign; à mà bòṅ mà f̤̌ muṅkuṳ bo
it is not fair to cheat a child.

fṳ̌ ndab, v. roof the house with grass; f̯̌ fu ndab

fṳ̌, v. care for, take pains with; l
bi ma ni mf̤̌ mbùm yin bo̤ oo nocet think of it;
do not be anxious.

fu̯d, v. swarm; fjgo’ ni mfd, ni the termites
swarm out on the return of the rains.

fṳ̍f̌bntsì, n. water ditch, pool (during the raining season);
§ fòkàṅnbo̤ṅ, also: f̤̌fǎbntsi

fṳ̀̍fòd, n. also: fṳ̯f̤d wind, breeze;
bo kà bo̤ ni mbob f̤̌f̤d they were on the cattle-track, ;
they were up-wind;
yǐ esu bo̤ ndzo̤ dzòdntsi bo f̤f̤d your talk is like the
noise of water and of no use (as wind); j
f̤̍fd ntànka̤̯d strong wind;
f̤̍f̤d mfo̤nika̯d mild wind

f̯ko̤b, n. spoon, ladle

f̤̌ mbùm, v. take trouble, make an effort, take care of;

§ kam
f̤̀̍n, v. lock, close; § mf̤̍nf̤n, kěǎ’ f̤n
n. image, (exact) likeness ;

funi ṅgòṅ ṅgṳ̯ le bo̤ ila’ e? which is the likeness
of the big town?

 

=

fu̯ni, v. liken, look like; mon e funi ba i teēae child is
like its father; § f̯

N;

fi, v. pretend, deceive; § fan̤̍ni

fùnmi mi’, v. simulate, make believe, lip service;
bo dzi (start) tab mà f̍ni mi’ they begin to be
insincere on their part;
bi ma ndzu’ ni yab ni f̤̍nmimi’ bo̤ co not obey them
with lip-service;
màn ti mà u ni ṅgoṅ ntṳ̤ i me’ bo̤, i kṳ̯ ntfsu nù
mbò bo̤ ni f̤̍nimi’ when someone does not love
you wholeheartedly, he talks to you only hypocritically.

fṳ̀ṅ̯, v. growing of a wound or ulcer
futi, n. fraud, deceit, deception; § kef̤ti
fui, v. deceive; § fati, doṅu

f̍tintan, n. market- fraud

f̍kìsà’, n. spiky cap or hat (originally from Bikom)

 

 

 

ga, n.

gà, v.

gàb, v.

gàblì, n.

gag;. V.

gau, v.
Gàlabè, n.

gàli, n.

Gàmàùti, n.

flute of bamboo

whistle with this flute (women are not allowed
to be present).

circumcision (originally done during puberty

between Voma and Lela) ;

the freshly circumcised boys lived in a special house
(ndâgàb), until they were healed. The parents had to
appoint supervisors or guardians - one for every Is
boys - and had to supply food for the boys and the
guardians;

bo yγǒ̤ gàb they go to be circumcised;

bo kw gàb they return from circumcision.

circumcise (grown up men)

diarrhoea of children caused by change of milk, be it by
change of wet-nurse or new pregnancy of the mother.

be disobedient ;
bon ni yò ndib mvi ni ṅgag mb bàba yab, le bo (ìgâ,
bo ni ntṳ̯n tu nowadays children disobey their fathers,
they are obstinate or butt-headed ; § 1ǎ’ ntuṅ
stir up, incite, instigate
name of a chief of Balikumbad

also: gàri cassava flour; § kàsinga,

one of the branches of the Bali tribe

gàni, n. pl. bàgàni nobility ;

bàgàni ku̯ mbo̤ kwàtad temnere are only seven no belmen
in the tribe: seven sons and heirs;

t Tita Gwamoma (tà jacob Ngwaṅgua) ;

2? Tit

. plant from which red dye is obtained

flute, mouth-organ ;
gàṅ bo̤ yum mà džb ntsi m̯̤̌ tene flute is an instrument
for singing.

Gàṅsin, n.

gàri, n.
Gàsàò, n.

Gàńòṅa, n.

target; mà ť̤m gàṅ to shoot at a target

agree upon, fix up, scold , want, desire; mfòn gaṅ bd ni
ṅgàb the chief agreed upon war for the coming week;
mu̍ ni ṅgaṅ boo̤ kṳ̍ki I want to see but the so and so;
fà’, ù gaṅ a mà f’ a, bo ila’ e ?’ what work do you intend
to do? sì̇’gaṅ yà bo̤ fà’ kukè I want to work as a cook;
ṅ’ku̯ ṅgaṅ u gaṅ mà to tsà’ti u, mùn ti tum a bo I am
pleased to come and greet you, but nobody sends me;

i 1Iǎ’ ṅgaṅ a gaṅ hae scolded me;

ù gaṅ a gaṅ kè bu ̤̌ ni mǎ’ nù e?’ are you scolding out
of mere pleasure or do we have s.th. between us (a bone
of contention) ?

one of the seven groups of the Bali, a small group only,
south of Balikumbad.

cassava flour; § gai
one of the seven groups of the Bali south of Balikumbad

one of the seven groups of the Bali settled in Bali-ioṅa

gańoṅwaduṳńa, n. war-spear of the king Bali-Noṅa

n.

gbug, n.

gbug, v.

one of the seven groups of the Bali

grudge, anger ; bo nyuyṅ mg̤̍ gbug madzi boòm yab
they took it to heart and are very angry;

d n kà ku ni gbug ma boòm ti his grandfather died
with a grudge in his heart (’belly’’).

press strongly

gbṳ̍l̤̍ṅ, adv. heavily; § kpoṅdo̤ṅ

gbwanla, n

gib, v.

gibsila, n.

gibti, v.

. attendant in a drinking house; also a man who makes

fire for the chief.
hesitate, dodge, loiter;
i gib a ni nàù sili le he is wasting my time over a trifle;

ù ni ṅgib ti you are boring; 3 gibsila, ľ̤my

waste of time, boredom, dawdling ;
à wěěf gibsila ṅgwè u e? are you affected by boredom?

hesitate; § gib

 

 

gilà, n. chest
gila, n. breastbone
gòla, n. medicine for war and hunting

golabè , n. precious gown

gomnà, n. government

gob, v. aim at (with a gun)

go̤bli, v. staggering walk, owing to sick feet

go̤g, v. embroider, ornament with needlework (Bali-clothes)

gǒ̤la, n. bier, stretcher (for sons or daughters of kings); § kun

go̤ṅntsa, v. dam the river (Bamoun); § bug ṅntsi

gùba, n. ttree sp. (in the steppe quite fire resistant) ;
the decoction of its leaves is used as medicine against
ulcers. Fibres (nswi’) are dyed by boiling them with
the leaves of that tree; the bark is ground and used as
a powder on ulcers; the trunk serves as timber, because
it is hard and not easily attacked by termites; apart
from this, it is used as charcoal for smithing. It is
not good as firewood.

gù’ li, v. move, fidget with, struggle ;
mombod ni (ṅgù’li the child kicks its clothes off;
mwà’ ni ṅgù’li madzi li’ ta tekhe uaust irritates my eye .

gwàvya, n. hall, dancing hall in front of the palace

gbwanla, n. attendant in a drinking house; also a man who makes
fire for the chief.

gwànmu- sìa, n. (tsu big man;
à bo̤ màn, i ni ndoo̤m mbàùm i a, i mà ṅu’si mbùm bo̤
it is a man who is humble and does not brag.

gwansòa, n. ugust

gwǎnìńi, n. hyena; gwàńńi kà kwa̤d mb ba me’ the hyena killed
all my sheep.

gwà̍ti, v. also: gw̍ti shake; v̇gwi à ni ṅgwa̤ti ndzi tebi my wife
is shaking the table cloth.

gwè, n. pl. bàgwè gouardian, officer, jester

gw̍ti, v.

γàbti, v.

γàd, adv.

γad, n.

γagli, v.

γàgsàg, n.

γàγγà, v.

shake; § gw̤ti

say, affirm; § tsu, suṅ

portion; yàb v̇̇gṳ lion’ s share ;

yàb boṅ mà (̇gwa̤n () share the prey already in the
field; if you take it home, there will be many more
who will want to have a share; not much wmill be left
for the hunter himself; § tuyγàb

share out; § seobti, yebti

suddenly, awfully; à mè it rocks awfully;
bo dz̤̀mṳ̯ yab mè yàd tenaey turned suddenly.

crab sp., a big kind of crayfish; § kam

also: γogli weave, bind loosely, not correctly
meager to the bones, meagerness, leanness ;

n’ti kwà’ yàgsàg i me’ 1 have become very thin ;

ṅ’k̯ ntsi mè kwà’ yγàgsàg i I am vrhaolly destitute; § dzum

open and close loudly and repeatedly

γàṳ̍li, adj. rough (of badly woven cloth or bag)

γàlàṅ, n.

scaffold, framework, brickwork, debris of s.th., skeleton;
γàlà’ mùn skeleton of man;

γyàlà’ kùṅ a broken box; yaàlà l̤ṅ a shaky stool;

γyàlà’ lampud a lantern without glass ;

yàlà’ ndab, also: yàlà’ ndab, u yàlǎ ’ ndab a house
without plaster, not yet done or scratched off ;

γyàla’ ṅgùm vwing of the framed roof;

kwà yàla’ ṅgùm tere four sides of the roof

fine grass, used for thatching roofs; bo bǒ̤ ṅkwǐ’ yalàn,
à ti’ vin mà f̯̌ tu ndab when ,adan is cut, it is
called vin and is used for thatching roofs; § vin

 

 

 

γǎṅbòm, n.

spread, cover densely (of climbers) § cso̤̍m, mbiyan, ńa’

. bàyan teohief, theft; § tso̤b yan, ntsob, dž̤

chest, front part of chest; § gilà, saṅgàṅ

pl. of ṅgàṅ owner of, quality of, occupation, profession
γǎṅṅwà’n scholars, pupils

wind with s.th., bind;

bo yγṅ i ni ṅk̤̤̍ they bound him with a rope.

bo lo’ ni ndo̤ they wound the calabash with strings
of young palmribs (ndo̤), so that it does not break

so easily and can be carried better.

i γàṅ tse, γǒ̤ binti ma fà’ he prepares a trap (for

white rats) and sets it on the farm 3 nali, kud, rṅk̤̍

big belly, said as invective to children;
yo̤ mɑû γǎṅboòm i nazo̤ (ook ast that big baelly

γǎṅmi’, n. pl. of ṅgàṅmi’ town-guardians

γǎṅmù̯ńùṅ ,
γǎṅndânsis,
γàṅni, v.
γàṅni, v.

γarṅni, v.

γaṅu̯, v.

n. pl. of ṫgàṅ mù̯nùṅ

n. body guard of chiefs (in war).

work too much without

swell (of body)

also: γoṅni open;

ṅgàṅbommbad(ṅ ni ṅgo̤ṅni mbaṅ, the potter opens

the pot; § azen

also: garṅu̯ think aboutiit first; § sarvṅti, kwà ni

γǎṅvvomtimbu̯m, n. drinking club, society, (secret society)

γa’, v.
γa n.
γâ’, adv.

bo ni (ṅgomti mbṳ̯m teonhey honour the cowrie shell,
(it is believed to have some power).

dig road; § ya’tci

bark, bowl; outermost
sòdṅ ma ya’ outermost tooth, wisdom tooth

here Iǎ yt’ pass herel
mg ni nnoṅ ma yâ’ le locive here; le here;
ma yâ’ màè le ere.

== o::
γa’bo, n. pl. γǎ’ mbo, ṅga’mbo shoulder blade
γa’dzi, n. pl. of ṅga’ dzi, also: γa’ tì, ṅga’ tì bark of the γa’-tree
γa’kě, n. scales, husks
γa’mbàṅ, n. nut shell (of oilpalm fruit)
γa’mbiyaṅ, n. husk, shell of peanut
γa’ndab, n. strutting, reinforcement of housewall
γa’ṅgwàfu̯d , n. covering leaves of maize cob
γa’ṅkùn, n. pod of bean
γa’ṅu, n. crescent
γa’ṅwà’ni, n. cover (book) (ad ̇wà’ ni page

γa’tì, n. pl. ṅga’ tì (a, ta- ma) armpit; ya’ti a ny armpit;
ṅga ti ma ny armpits.

ya’ti, n. bark of a tree sp.; § yza’dzi

γa’ti, v. γ. màndzìi make way through grass by parting it =
mà tti màndzi = mà ṅa’ṳ̯ màndzi, ṅgâ ṅgo̤ ma nǎěn bo;
§ pa’, ta’ti

γa tṳ̯, n. bark of a tree;
mà dzùb ya’t’ṳ̯ remove bark from tree or stic k;
mà kǎm ya’t’ṳ̯ peel, loosen or take off bark;
bo tsiti γya’tuy ṅgâ, à seti they beat the bark to
have it in pieces.

γa’u̯, v. also: γa’a pousnh a door, push aside;
’mà ya’u̯ ntsǐbù’ push the compound door aside;
bo ya’uṳ̯ ntsǐ ndà ikoòb they opened the door of the
newly dedicated church;
ntsu ndab open the doorl § u

γa̤n ntan, v. trade, sell;
bimo’ bàùn ya’ ni ṅgan ntan, ni ndzun ma
ntan Bà’ ni, ṅgǒ̤, ni mfin ma mǎ’ ntan some people
here trade; they are buying corn in the Bali market
and go and sell it in another market; § be’ti

 

