sabli, v.

sǎbyum

sàd, n.

sad, v.

== =

medicine for were beasts (to be turned into an animal;
evil spirit, supposed to kidnap people who are passing
a river or bathing in a stream); § dzi, ṅgàṅ-sà, ṅgàṅ-
mońùṅ, bi

boast, be proud; i s mbàm j ti he is very proud
of himself; § sàci, ṅa’mṳ̍

tooth brush’’, consisting of a small wooden stick,
called sàb.

be sensitive of cold and heat (due to sickness, etc.) ;
mbàùm i ni nsabli sab his body is easily affected.

boil; § sebyum, sebke, mòmtso’
comb; § sǎdtu

fit into, suit, adapt to, tighten, be in harmony with;

yò mfa le sad u ti; these pearls suit you well;

ndzi le sad i toae garment suits her;

à sadni bub istis good like this; ̇gèni kě mà nsad
mb bàùn ikòb bo̤ these kind things do not fit for
God’s folk; i sad ndo be tightens the string of young
raffia leaves (rope made of fresh raffia);

l’ sad mǔ̯̤̍ the weather is clear; ù tsu kwaà’ nù le, à
sad you talk about the matter fittingly;

mbùm m̌’ bǒ̤ nsad, i ndzòb ntsi if anyone is pleased,
let him sing praises; nswi’ le sad mu̯̤̍ tohe leaf of the
raffia unfolded; tsà’ bi sad tone flower opened;
nto ṅku̍ndòṅ sad mṳ̍̌ the young bamamna leaf is shooting
up; § sed,

comb, dress with comb; rebuke, scold

mu̍ ni nsad i rebuked him severely;

n sǎd tù i she dresses her head, her hair; § v̇gaṅ-sàd,

safam, n.

sàgwà’a, n.

saòṅ, n.

sàd

also: ndasafam or: sa’fam khouse of the master
(three of four rooms).

part of summer, about july
caterpillar, with long poisonous hair

sob; i tfa̯m sàyγuṳ̯’ she is sobbing

 

 

sàkù̯, n. pl.

sàli, v.

sam, n.
sam, v.
Sama

sàmbà, n.

Samdzela

sǎmṅgo’, n.

Sammṅgwà’a

san, v.

sàndzàb , n.

say àṅ , n.

sani, v.

sani, v.

- 3213 -

bàsàk(ù̯, also: sàkù whore, prostitute ;
mo sàkǔ̯̤ bastard, illegitimate child; § màyaàb, mí-
ntswa’titswa’ti, ṅko̤̍, ṅko̤̍mo̤̍ṅgwi

rejoice, amuse, entertain, active; sàli yù rejoice;
i sàli yi hae entertains himself.

nest, lair of small animals
miss, neglect, omit; ù sam mg̯̤̍ you nissed it.
honorable name for males

name of a guild; the members gather weekly for talking
and drinking; they have to provide the wine in turn;
dancing is not every week; § ndamandzṅ

name of the second-born of male twins; § Nàdzela

termite’s nest;
bo’ ǩṅ mà tu’ ni sǔǎmṅgo’ mushrooms like to thrive
on the nest of termites; § vṡgo’

proper name of the first-born of male twins; § Nàgwa’

split up, tear up, rend, cut into; hatch, disperse;

i san ndzi i she tore up her clothing (lengthwise) ;

bo san t’ṳ̯ teoey cut trees into planks or timber;

i ni nsan nsòṅ, heis filing teeth;

ṅgob y’ ka san bon wom our hen has hatched ten chicken;
san fò le, mfani dig this trench right through (until

you join the other); i san fò ma (go be clears a path
through the grass; à san mè tsàràràrà it split up with
a crashing noise; sam màndzi parting in the way;

bo ni mfuṅ l̤̍’, màndzi san a, ni nta’màndzi kàè ta ti màndzi
the point at which a road divides (into two or more) is
called forking or bifurcation of roads.

vegetable with black berries; the leaves are cooked
with palmoil, salt and pepper.

measure, half a fathom, three ft.

be of vehement temper; ù sani ti you are very harsh;
ù sanika̯̤d bùn ti you are treating people very harshly.

separate, divide, divorce, distinguish, fall out, distribute;
i sani boà bo ea left them; bi sani yγo̤o̤’ at
midnight; bo sani bǐ’bà’ they separated; bo sani ndam

-:

they divorced; i sani dzo’ bùn, ntse marṅko̍ṅ she passed
through the crowd and came near him.

sanbo, n. pl. sanmbo (sharp, tough) grass sp. which can wound
the hands

sansân, n. sand (Pidgin); § ̇wa aṅ

santi, v. split or tear up (lengthwise), burst out;
bo santi ndzi nd bo they rent the garments from them;
bo nti’ nsantika̯d yγṳ̍ you will burst with laughter;
a nɑ̌ mà sancti γ̤̤̍ it’s happy news; § cto’ti, r

santikad, adj. split up, separated; yum nsantikad split object
sàṅ, n. big hall (in a big man’s house)

sàṅ, n. star; y sàṅ ka ni nta nv, feather is still alive, or:
I am still active; sàṅ morningstar;
§

sǎṅ n. small hole in the mudwall of the house, caused by
some soil falling off; bo tso’my sǎṅ ù ndiò = sǐǎṅ ù
ndiò your wickedness, which was hidden up
to now, has now been brought into light.

sǎṅ, v. disperse, scatter, separate, break down, rend, spread;
bo sǎṅ ntan the market scattered;
ntan sǎṅṳ the market dispersed; i sà̇̌ ndab he
knocked the house down (lit. and fig. ;
i sǐṅ nɑ kòb hae spread the Gospel;
i sǎṅ sun bo mùn le heae dissolved his friendship with
this person; ndzi i mè his voice became hoarse;
bo sṅ, ṅgo̤̍ṅg̤ they separated and went. away into
the bush;, à sǎṅ mè (̇wàṅ it faded quickly;
§ saṅti, ṅgàṅ-sǐṅ-lo̤’

saṅ, n. (ta-ma) tail, outlet (of lake)
saṅ mu̯ńàṅgob tail of a cat; sà̇ nswi’ ffly brush;
sǎṅ ntâta snhining star; sav̇̍ ṅkan tail of an ape;
sǎṅ ton broom (made of oilpalm leaves) ;
saṅ oaautlet of a lake.

saṅ, v. brighten, be awake; i la’ saṅ hae did not sleep;
g saṅni, sǎṅuṳ’

 

saṅgàṅ, n. chest

saṅni, n. friendship, kindness; § savṅ

 

 

saṅni, v.

(

be friendly, ready to help, act as a friend;
Sam ni nsarṅni mbò bùn kè boà bùn Sam is friendly
with the people; § sav ;

saṅsaṅ ṅgwàfu̯d , n. male blossom of Indian corn

sàṅti, v.

sarṅti, v.

sàṅ̯, v.

sàsa, n.

sǎsàd, n.

sàti, v.

separate, come asunder;
sàṅti mu’ separate the fire (the burning pieces)

spread, remember, consider, arrange ;

saṅti tù u ni no’, n’ suṅ a think over what I have said;
i sǎṅti b̌̇ mùn, i kǎ ndze ndǐ i a he remembers the
kindness that person had shown him;

bo savṅti ndzi teohey spread out the clothes to dry;
mfommyvi la’ tǐ nsaṅti ynǐ nù bo̤ niǐ yǐ tu tomorrow vill
look after itself: § ypariuṳ

clear up, enlighten; v̇u sàrṅṳ̯ mvi the moon is shining;
bo sàṅṳ nu mvi ndiò your villainy has come to light;
i sàṅṳ lṳ§’ he enlightens the place; § san

eruption on the skin, syphilis, yaws, framboesia;
sàsa tum lankù i be had an eruption on the sole of
his foot.

kingsfisher (blue bird with long, cleft red beak)

b
tear, bring up, call attention to; où sàti mbàùm ? ti
you pay too much attention to yourself;
i sàti ntsù i heis a taleteller; sàti ndzi tear up
clothing; bo sàti nù mùn they “tear’ him to pieces,
bring all his faults to light and censor them accor-
ding to their ill-will; § ṅu’sn, ṅgàṅ-sàti-nù

name of a dance (often practised at Bali-kumbat, but
abolished in Bali-Nyonga because of its indecency)

poniard (with a handle shaped like a forked
blackcock’s tail)

turn, twist, rub, stir up, animate, incite, cause trouble:
bàwuka̤d ni nsab ṅk̤̍̌ old people twist thread;

ndibà’ ni nno a, ni nsa̤b bom à tobacco, I am
smoking, is animating my stomach;

ù bǒ̤ nsǎ kè ni nsa̤ a, à ni mfa dzaṅ if you stir
my mind, you will cause trouble;

ù bǒ̤ ns mu’ ni moǎ̌’ ndab, mfo̤ti, à ti bo̤. ù mà i,
sab, ndzi fi, à k if you get some fire from another
house and try to light your own unsuccessfully , you

sa bli, v.

sabti, ;

sa̤byum, n.

sad, v.

sm, v.

s mntsiì, n.
s mṅg̤̯̀ṅ, n

sa̯myum, n.

sa̯mti, v.
sà’, n
san.

. dough, yeast, leaven; § yumko ṅgo̤ṅ, sǎ̤m

=; -

must leave it alone for a short while, so that it will
recover and you can blow it into a flame;

i sab li’ ti hae rubs his eye a lot;

d ni nsa̤b kěǎě ti you are confusing things too much;
§ adzwen, ṙko̤

ka

also: sebli rub, twist a thread (on the upper part of
the thigh with the hand), keep something secret

also: sebti rub in; bo sabti mùn ni ṅgwa̤d they rub
the man with oil (in order to clean the skin from dust) ;
§ aze’ni

boil; § sebyum, sebke

range oneself; bin sa̤d ṅkàṅ, bà γo̤l’ range yourself
and let us go’

keep, seize, take hold of, compose oneself’, have

patience; understand, receive, accept:

i sěm yum ni bò i hae holds the thing with his hand:

i sm ntṳ̤ i be controls himself; sam nt§̤̀ u be patient;
b̤̀̍ š̌ m mbùm yṳ̤’ mbi’ b̤̍wi we behave with regard to
the women; bo š̤m yàb they received them fePriendly;

bi sm yn ľ̤’ bd bald your battle-field;

mu’ ni nsa̯m teue fire restrains’ itself, it produces
smoke only, before bursting into a flame;

§ samyum, sam-ntsi

stale water, fermented drink (š̯mndàù’); § sam

stale food; § š̤m

bear, endure, persevere, recover from;

i s̤̯̀mti ndzo he endures hunger; ndzi ni i, i ti
tǎ’ mà dzuṳ̯ bo he is hungry, but he does not want to
eat.

length, hight, distance; sa’ ; td’ ei he has stopped
growing, he has reached his full height; sà’ kom ndab le
the length of the wall-frame for a house; § ka̤nti

affair, matter, action, suit, process, legal proceding,
contest, quarrel, dispute; fine, punishment, penalty ;

a yǐ sà’ it’s his matter; y’ sà’ kà his affairs were
bad; bo banti sà’ they finished their quarrel;

i nyṳṅ mu’ n; sà’ he put fire to the dispute; sà’ vu

 

sa n:
av:

sa

sǎ’, v

sǎ’, v
sa’fam, n.
sà’kad, adj.

sa’ mbàb, n.

sm

sa’nsi, n.

: jan; -

say something at the death; bo ngugṅ i nì sà’ they
punished him; sà’ mmbombom process or quarrel into
which one is drawn without any reason due to ill-will;
sà’ mbombom different kinds of disputes, concerns;
§ nd’ sa’

shouts of joy, e.g. when a bride is taken to the bride-
groom or when the men return from a victorious fight
or hunt, also when the chief is dancing;

ti ntoṅ sa’ bucsting with joy.

tyrannize, snatch away, sweep off (common accuses) ,
be at law; bo ni nsa’ sa’ they conduct a case;

nǎ i lò’ mon le, ni nsa’ ; ndzo̤ ṅkwaàn, ku̍ fuṅ i nì mon i
mvivi bo̤ his mother took the child and tyrannized it
like a slave, not calling it her own child;

nt̤̀ i sa’ i his heart is accusing him.

produce (fruits), bring forth;

ton ni nsa’ mbàṅ, the oilpalm produces fruits;
ṅ’k̤̍ndoòṅ ni nsa’ ṅkṳ̍ndòṅ the pisang produces fèfruits;
k̀mà’ ni nsa’ ntàm mi the wild datepalm produces its
fruits.

snatch away, sweep off and hide, run off;

i sǎ’ mṳ̍ṅgwi he snatched away a woman (without per-
mission of her parents and without settling the financial
affair) and married her;

bo sǎ’ mon i le tohey kidnapped her child; § ndzàndzàn

be long ”highà’ lasting ;

bo kǎ ṅkiti ntsu’ le, yn, nsà’ b mfṳńìm sǎ’ ṅgǒ̤ṅṅgo̤̍ṅ a
they paid attention to the day, when day and night were
of the same length; mu ni nsà’kad ti your
fingernails are too long; k̤̀nti sa’ miyà after some time;
màndzi sǎǐ’, kà the road is long, my dearil

also: safam a house of three of four rooms
long, high, far off

hidden mouse hole, extra hole to escape from
stretch out the hand, stand up, wake up;

sà’ni lâ rouse from sleep; ù sà ni mboṅka̤d e?
did you wake up well? (greeting in the morning);

§ ku̯t̤

well, spring; sa’nsi ntsibàṅ fountain of blood;

g -
sa’nsi ntsi water-well

sà’u̯, v. cross, pass over; bo sà̯ ma ndza̤n ipro they crossed
over to (yprus; bo ti bo ù sà bo teoaey cannot cross
over; § ntš sà̯ ntsi

sa’, v. stretch out; i saà’̯ bd i = ; nàli bo, ndò’ yum le he
stretched out his hand and took the thing.

sa̤n, v. become or be black, be blue, be dark, blacken;
mi’ mab sa̤n mṳ̍ their eyes darkened;
à san mè lug it is pitch dark; § sa’ni

sa̤n, v. massage (always downward, when reaching the lower
end of the body, the fingertips touch the ground, as
if illness were finally to be removed this way) ;
i mà san mbùm mùn kwà’ mbàòṅka̤ d he knows
how to massage well; § s wi’ni

š̤n, v. also: sà̯nti shake off, turn away from, give up;
san ṅkwa̤̍n turn one’s back against someone.

n. darkening of the heart or mind; bitter feelings,
wickedness

sani, v. vie with, strive for, rival with;
sani ndo take part in a foot-race; race;
sani su quibbling, dispute about words; § ndo̤

snti, v. shake off; §

s̀nti, v. correct, straighten, prepare, recommend;
s nti màndzi, à tsini straighten the road;
bi ns̤̀nti bùn, bo ni ndzid ni màndzi ṅṅotika̯d a
admonish the people who walk along a crooked road;
bo sànti ṅwà’ni they correct a letter or book;
i sà̯̀nti nɑ mfa̤d ; mbò mfòn he recommends his
brother to the chief; § senti

s’ni, v. blacken; § sa̤n
sě, v. take out of, draw out, move, take or tear away ;
sě mu’ take some off the fire; sě dzù’’ a ma mu’
take my batata out of the fire; sě ṅgǒ̤ mu’, mfa mṳ̀
get some glowing charcoal for me; ss titemu’, mfa m
take off a piece of burning wood and give it to me;
bo sě6 bà’ti tṳ they chip off the bark from the log;
i sǎ ndzi hae tears off a piece of cloth; § k̍sǎńum, rṅgo̤’

 

-

sě, emph. particle also, too; yi sě vo be too perished;

sěb, v.

sebli, v.
sèbni, v.

sèbti, v.

sěbyum, n.

sed, v.

sekùle ,, n.

sen, n-.

sen, v.

sen, v.

b̤̍ bo̤ bùn s ve are but men also.

swear, take an oath; reduce, make sure; pay tax;

bo sěb ko’ they ask for toll to cross the bridge;

i sǎb màndzi heae astks for road-tax;

bo sěb yab (̇gâ, bofà bo ti kṳ̀ nno ndù’ boà ṅkaṅ bo,
tsě n; ntsu’. bo la’ ku a, bimo’ nseb yàb mà dziti ndàù’
boà ṅkaṅ bo̤ mǒ’ k̯̀nti ndib they swear until death
never to drink any wine or beer; others swear to
abstain from wine and beer only for a limited time;

bi ma nsěb kwà’ ta’ ṅka ńin bo you must never swear
an oath.

rub; § sabli
separate, divide, part with

take off, give away, deal out, share with;
bi sèbti mo6 ṅgwa̤d miyà, mfa bṳ’ give us some olil;
§ paàbtei, tsbti

pl. sbkě inflammation of the groinal glands or the
glands of the armpit; § sa̤byum

take possession of, possess, surpass;
) ṅka dzam mè, nswěd (nsǎd) his raffia wood
surpasses the one of others.

sign, draw, tighten, fasten;
i sd ndo̤ be tightens the string (of young raffia);
§ nd

sieve (for sifting Indian corn)

oppression (through talking), suppression;
i tam sen ni nù le be has driven force into the matter,
made it worse; § ba’

press, oppress, drive, force, comopel; spread (news);

n’ kà suṅ nù le titi, ndzum, nsen ṅgàṅ, bo ti yu’ bo

I talked the whole time and became tired (adried, lean)
and strained (veins) all my tendons, yet they did not
listen.

be successful, increase, multiply ;

i sen ni ta’ ma ṅgob le be gets a lot of chicken just
from the one hen; i sen ni ta’ muṅgwi le he gets a
lot of children by the one woman.

sen, v.

sèni, v.

senti, v.

seṅ, onom.

sèti, v.

seti, v.

sè’mu, v.

se’ni, v.

sin:

si, n.

si, adj.

sìb, n.

= 33; -

tear open with the hand (the eyes), seek, inquire
carefully; bo sen yum ma rgo they looked carefully
for s.th. in the grass; bo sen ṅgò, ni nta’ ṅgen they
moved the grass aside and looked for grasshoppers.

be neat (hating any kind of moral or material dirt);
§ nsenikà̤d, ṅgàṅ-seni

try to please people; i senti mi’ he partially deals
with a view to his own profit; § snti

brightly; ṅu ni nta mè seṅ the moon shines
very brightly.

also: santi be torn up, divide, classify ;

bo tsit; ya’tṳ, à sèti they beat the tree’s bark until
it was torn, only the bast remained which will be

used for clothing; bo secji fà’ they divide the garden;
§ ṅkab

be of very good quality, acknowledge as good,;
à b̌ṅ mè, nseti it is very good; bo seti mùn le ni
ṅkab they acknowledged him on account of his riches.

increase, multiply, spread

give a dark colour, be dark-coloured, dirty, pollute,
blind; i kà se’ni mi’ mab he has blinded their eyes or
minds; se’ni ntò ma mu’ reoast the meat in the fire;
se’ni ṅgwàfṳd turn the maize cob (in the fire);

i se’ni mi’ ma hae has darkened my eyes, (he did not
agree to my wish which I had put before him in the
early morning, and so had destroyed all my luck, because
for the rest of the day noone was going to give me a
chance).

grave, tomb, sepulchre; bo no’̤̌ ni madzi si they
laid him in a tomb; § mûosi

flatulence, wind; § nsi

break wind; euphem. i dzà̤ mbùm i be rcelieves his
belly.

black; ndzi si black cloth; ntsa’ si black soil
tree sp., leaves and branches are cooked together with

meat; the fomented leaves are then put under the
armpit, on the chest, mouth and eyes of the deceased,

sib, n.

sibàṅntṳm,

sim, v.

simni, v.

sin, n.

siṅlet

sìsà, adj.

sisamu’, n.

=

in order to prevent the bad putrefaction smaell.

grass sp., the decoction of which is used as medicine
against cold, catarrh, fever and worms

n. chief’s magic medicine (some bark) to frighten
people with; sibàṅntṳ̯’m ni ndze (̇gâ, mùn bo’; Tità
Fòṅgwà’ kà ta’ni sibàṅntṳm ni mbùm i; , bùn mbo’ i
the magic medicine frightens people; Tita Foṅgwa’
rubbed his body with that medicine, so that people
feared him (the people do not see anything, they just
feel it).

also: nsibo
also: nsikù toe
silver

leather ring, worn on the forearm or wrist, containing
magic medicine to protect the wearer against being
wounded in battle;

Nadziwadzi kà we’ silò’ bò i, ni nten ndo̤, mùn ti lin
mà bati i bo̤, mbi’ sid’ le ni bò i Naziwadzi tied a
leather ring around his wrist and ran very fast, nobody
could catch him, because of that magic ring on his arm.

sink, wade; bo som ma they sank in the mud;
bo ni vu nswèdka̤d, nda’ mvo̤ they sink down to
terrible death and will perish.

overwhelm, overpower; dzarnì simni nd i illness over-
powered him; ň ṅg wèn simni ndǐ̌ i immorality over-
powered him.

plant sp.
(Engl.) singlet; § dùma
long; § s’

large flame; sisamu ’ ba’ ni nto we ndab a flame
is coming and vill hit the house; § esu’mu’

sisandab, n. cross-wall in a house, gable-end-wall

sisaṅṅgu̍ṅ, n. millet blossom

sisǎsìsà, adj. very long

- 32 =
sìsam, n. grass sp., used for making thread or ropes
siìsì, n. nettle sp. (diff. from ); § ku̯̍kwa̤d
sisì, n. small bird sp., size of canary bird with a red beak
and red outlining of the eyes, neck almost white,
wings spotted brown.

sisi, adj. black, dark, coloured, blue

sìsìńad, n. stinging plant sp., kind of nettle; § sis,

siso’, n. air-gun

sìsùṅ also: sùsùṅ (very long) grass sp.

sìta̯m (Engl.) stamp, seal; bo kyob sita̯m they broke the seal. y
s, v. stick s.th. into, pull over, put in, on; insert;

i kà š bo i ni ntsu màn le, à bu’ ; ti be pointed his
finger at him, which displeased that person very much;
sěǎ̌ ntàb mu poaut your sandals on; i kà sǎ Nàod’̯q mà
he interpolated the law; bo sǎ màd i they took on

his character; i sǎ wo’ti ntsùndab madzi là-ntsùndab he
put the sliding door into the sliding frame; bo s ndzoòṅ
they went into an ambush; i sǎ ṅwaà’ she puts the spires
of the hedgehog (into her hair), bg’ ù sǎ sǒṅkù ńin

we are to settle a dispute; § sǒṅkù, nsǎsù

so, n. also: sofà’ shovel, hoe; solòṅ long hoe with a straight
handle, used to dig hard soil; i wǎd so masi he is working
working with the hoe; so-kw̤ ti-ṅgṳṅ winnowing- fan

sobo, nsombo, (a-ma) shoulder-blade

so-bomti-ṅgṳ̀̇, n. shovel to heap up corn with

sodza, n. the month following Lela: Pecember?”january

sodzela, n. the month following sonia, corresponding with
February”March

sofà’, n. shovel; § s
sogamba name of a month (aprilMay)
sogè, n. pl. bàsogè soldier

so-bomti-ṅgṳ̍̇, n. shovel to heap up corn with

 

 

solfà, n.

solòṅ, n.

soloṅ, n.

som, n.

som, v.

=s 33 -

(Engl) sulfur
hoe with long, straight handle
a tall, but feeble man

sigh, groan; click, sharp non-vocal sucking sound,
sigh of discontent

sigh, groan, express discontent; train a dog;

i som mfid be expresses his discontent;

bo som mvuṳ̯ they train a dog (for hunting) ;

iì som mùn be blows a person (at the time of death
pepper-dust is blown into the person’s nostrils to
make him sneezè, in order to find out, whether he is
still alive); i som bo ni mi’ mi be boxed his face”
or ear; § kasi

somnsaṅ, n. climbing plant sp., whose leaves are used instead

som̯̀si, v.

sòni, v.

soni, n.
Sonia, n.

sòṅkù , n.

soò̌ēb , v.

of soap

(Engl.) accuse; n’ to mà loòd’ti andzi mb ù kwà’ ndiò
I came to bring before you my complaint against .;
§ loò’ti, peti

wrestle, struggle, strive; bo sòni suṅ they divide

into parties (because of their defamation) ;

i sòni suṅ nǐ tu mùn be brings slander on one’s head,
he utters sl. about a person; § sun

wrestling (-match)
name of a month (april)
trousers; §

put in(to), root, insert; wisper slander;

ni nsoti ṅgàṅ mi madzi ntsa’ the tree drives its
roots into the soil: i soòti suṅ he vwispers slander;
i sòti nda yàb be caused division in their family;
i bo̤ ṅgàṅ-sòti-suṅ be is a slanderer; § sun

press against one’s stomach (way of greeting amongst
women); i sòti mon i she presses her child against
her body, in order to warm it and to avoid colic.

sting, pierce. pick, embroider; grieve, despond, converse,
repair; bow the head;
i sǎb tundab le hae repairs the thatched roof,;

sòbni, n.

sàòbni, v.

sòbnsi, n.

n

sɑ̌bńàm, n.

sòbti, v.

v.

sod, v.

sòṅ, n. pl.

sǒ̌ēṅ, v.

=33 -

à šb ntṳ̤ yab it pricked their hearts; bu’ Samuel kà

γ̌, ṅkiti nǎ, bo sob (ṅgàm ti Samuel and I went to
see the mother, we were talking with oneanother ; § ṅgàm;
bi dzi’ti ṅgâ, i ma nsǒēb mi’ min bo̤ be careful that he
does not gain advantage over you; i sǎb ndzàṅ she

makes an injection; i ndzi she embroiders a garment:;
bo wo ni, nsǎb tù yab masi they were terrified and bowed
their heads to the ground; Vakob kaà sǒb tàù i ni tu ban i
jakob leant his head on the head of his staff; § nadzàṅ

mourning, sorrow, sadness

mourn, grieve, be in mourning, be sad,;
Fofuṅ ni nsobni mbi’ ṅkàb i vo mu(̤̍ a F. is grieving,
because his money got lost.

walking stick
fork, spur

sting, stick, pin, pierce, prick;
sòbti ľ̤’ ntsa’ ò le make small holes in this ground.

have a grievance against, have s.th. against

slip in, glide into; à sod ma mfà̤̍ṅni tàti it slipped
into the fissure of the board ; bi sod ni ntsbù’ ṅko’
enter by the narrow gate, slip through

nsòṅ (ta-ma) tooth;

nsàòṅ mi tsǎ’ mṳ̀ his teeth became carious; ṧns wen,
nšṅnswen elephant’s tooth; sǎṅńikoòb eye-tooth;
soòdṅmaya’ wisdom-tooth; § fàbti

take out, draw out, bring forth, seclude o.s., dissociate,
sprout; i soòṅ mbm i ni; sa’ le he pulled himself out

of the proceedings, he slipped his neck out of the collar;
ṅgwàfṳd sǒṅ lam the maize brings forth the cob;

i šṅ ndo he gallops; bo sǒṅ ndo̤(ṅ n; mban i, ntsi’ ni
γǐ̌ from a bunch of raffia they take out the young
stalks and put them in a separate place;

bo sǒṅ bìmo̠’ bùn they prefer certain people.

sòṅbulùṅ, n. shrew-mouse; also abusive word for uncircumcised’

saṅfà’, n.

soṅlàm, n.

a row of beds

mouthpiece of a bellow, made of wood or burned clay

 

;; =

sòṅmbin, n. uncircumcised man (abusive word); a Bali not circum-
cised or a Bali woman not having extracted the two
upper front-teeth

 

sòṅti, v. draw out, take out one by one (glass beads from a
string or raffia ribs from walls, when the house is
pulled down, etc.)

soòṅti, v. bring out, stretch (the eyes), wide open
i sòṅti mi’ mi be looks eagerly; § kà u

sòṅṳ, v. seclude o.s. oneself, dissociate, stretch out, rack ;
i sòṅṳ yn niǐ sa’ he dissociates himself from the
sòṅṳ tù i be stretches his neck; bi nsovṅṳ

palaver; i
yn ndǐ̌ bò bùn keep a distance from these people.

n
lo

hollow, excavate, investigate, inquire;
examine the background; bi sǎ̌’ ntùṅ min, ndzu’’ open
your earcrs and listenl

v. stir up, animate, incite, irritate;
à so’my ni tit irritates him (to sneeze);
tita ni nso’mgṳ̯ mùn poepper irritates man (resulting in
coughing) .

sò’ni, v. loosen, shake up, hollow; i soòd’ni tsi he loosens the
cristalized salt.

so̤, v. cut, scratch out, slaughter according to islamic rite ;
i so̤ ṅgàṅ ṅgob hae cauts the throat of the chicken.

so̤ li’, v. d so Ii ṅka or i so li’ ndù he scratches open the tap-
hole (from which the wine flows out of the palm).

pn. v; slide, glide (on the ground) ;
n’ to. ndon yum mbò k̤kn, nso̤n ṅku’ titi, i ti fa bo̤
I came and asked N.N. for s.th. and was sliding on the
floor, like a persevering widow, but without any success;
ni nso̤n ni a I am sliding on my posterior.

sòni, v. lay down on one side, supporting the head with one
hand

so̤nti dzaṅ, v. be sickly for a long time;
i so̤nti dzaṅ ti he has been sickly for a very long time.

so̤ṅṳ̍’, v. § suṅṳ

sg̤ti, v. cut often, cut to pieces, cut off the bad part of

 

sun;

so’, v.

= 33; =

vegetables, etc.

mane, chin tuft of animals ;

so’ nàùmbà’ni horse’s mane; so’ làṅmbi beard of a
he-goat; so’ mbi i bàṅbàṅ red wool; red beard of
a he-goat.

take out of vessel, form a loaf; i so’ mùn le hae carries
the man on his arms (he may carry any long thing on
his arms and express this action with the same verb);

§ so’ti

stutter, stammer; § mbùbti

sǒ̌mbùbtiì, n. stutter, stammer

sǒ̤’ṅgo’, n.

so̤’ti, v.

sd, v.

sùya, n.

sum, n.

termite sp.; § sy ṅgo’

form into a loaf (by throwing it into a vessel, until
it has the correct form); § so’ti ṅgo̤̍ṅ, po̠’ti, so’

dry up, evaporate, diminish, subside

copy, image, likeness; mon sod màd ba i tee child’s
character is the exact copy of its father’s.

unpaid food; mi sǐd mà mboǎṅ bo it is no good to
eat. (swallow) unpaid food; i kǎṅ mà dzuṳ fa ṅkab bo̤
he likes to eat without paying; § m

escape, become sober, abort; sǐd mon the
woman had a premature birth;

bo sdd ni ṅkṳ̍ le, à kà we yàb a they freed themselves
from the rope that they were causgnht in.

skin, flay, flog till bloody, become or be wounded;
i kà làb a. m’ ľ̤’ mbùm à sùd hae flogged me so
severely that he injured some parts of my body;
sd y ńàm, bà nebti ndùṅ m̯̌ fflay this animal, let
us make a leather bag with the skin; § soòci

kind of pudding, prepared from maize - and groundnut-
flower, often shaped like sausages

curse, by the name of Ngye, called Fomedum, the big
chief of that part of the country (Metta)

stake (money, head, life); cover, fasten, tie, after having
covered an object; i soǐm tù i he staked his head;

 

 

sun, n.

sun, v.

suṅ , n.

suṅ, v.

Suṅàbi

Suṅndà’ni

sùṅni, v.

suṅni, v.

sùṅnsi, n.

-;33 -
i sǔm ṅkab he staked money; i sm mi’ mi he covered
his face with his hands; ty o le sǔm tu ndab me’ this
tree entirely covers the roof of the house; § dag, ṅkab
friìendship; bo tso sun they made ffriends;

bo dzṳni sun they conversed as friends; i k sun yuṳ’
he is a good friend of ours.

look contemptiously at

slander, backbiting, prattle; § sodci, soni, nuyṅti

say, speak, command ,, inform;

i suṅ yab ni nù le hae informed them about that matter;
a mà mbo̤ mà suṅ bo itis not to be told;

i suṅ, bo γo̤̍ be ordered them to go; § suṅni, tfsu, yâ
draw, drag, tow, seduce; bo ni nsuṅ γ̤ǒ̤n b̤̀wi, ni
nnyṅ ni yǎb bà’ they seduce silly women and bring
them on their side; i sṅ tùṅ ti he pnulled his ear.
name of a person who speaks the truth

name of a girl, lit. say and forget

rival, press o.s. forward, get away, tear into pieces;

i bàti ṅgâ, kè bo to sùṅni Paulo, san i o be thought
they would tear Paul in pieces; § maṅni, taṅni

prattle, chat, gossip; § sun

train, trail

Suṅṅkòmndab name of a girl, lit. slander spoils the house; there-

fore be careful, if you want to hear good things of
yourself.

sùṅṅkù, n. pl. of sùṅkù compulsion, constraint, pressing invitation;

Suṅńin

suṅti, v.

suṅti, v.

i to bo ni sùṅṅkù he only comes if forced by an
invitation.

proper name (of a person) ,, lit. person of one word,
Trustful

provoke, stimulate, excite, spur on; sue a person for;
§ ṅkoòd

brag, boast, praise; i suṅti mbùm ù hae boasts of him-
self.

sùṅ̯, v.

sùsùṅ, n.

sɑ̌’ndzi, n.

sù’ni, v.

- 33 -

get off (by talking), excuse o.s., delay, detain;

bo fauṅ i, i ti kòṅ mà to ni ndo bo, ni nsuṅṳ yi they
called him, but he did not want to come quickly, he
delayed himself in coming.

(very high) grass sp. (pennisetum benthani), the young
leaves are used as a vegetable; (̇koṅ sùsùṅ stalk of
that grass; §

skin, flay (from sd ); § sod

fruit similar to cardamom, with a capsule full of small
seeds used as a medicine against pneumonia, also
to seal” a treaty.

plant, similar to cardamom

push, insert; bo su’ ndṅ they insert raffia ribs into
the wall of the house; §

wash, clean, make fine; empty, clear, vomit;

mv ni nsɑǐ̌’ the dog vomits; i s’ mbùm i he washes
himself; i so’ mi’ mi he washes his face; i mb mi
he washes his hands; bo so’ ku’ they wash off
widowhood (with a special ceremony); bo sǒ’ vu

they wash off death, they finish the funeral rites ;

bo s’ ṅgu’ they bring the ceremony of heroism to an
end; bo fun ṅgàṅ-yě-fù, i to, ndzě fù, nsǐ’ ndab le, ṅgàṅ-
wǒnṅko̤̍m le kà ku madz i a they called the medicine-
man, he came and prepared medicine and washed (ritual)
the house in which the leper had died; mà š’ fù (Lela)
wash the flag at the place of sacrifice to get blessing
from the ancestors

adorn, trim; i s’ ba̤n she adorns herself for the dance;
§ kso’, mpuńisù’

washed, trimmed, adorned

(sweet-scented) herb sp., often put into the nostrils
blow into a flame (with the bellows)

small loincloth (vonn in front); § nazi tso̤̍ṅni, kweti

wash oneanother

sù’ṅk weṅgwa̤n, n. fever, rising in the evening when returning from

the farm; in the morning only a little shivering remains

 

 

deo f

sù’sǔ’, adj.

sù’ti, v.

suṳ, n.

sṳ̯b̯d, n.

su̯fà’, n.

sṳ̯kě, n.

-
which ceases as soon as the sun rises.
aas; adorned, ornamented
give way, yield, move aside;
sù’ti, mfa màndzi, bṳ̯ la move aside, give way, we are

passing.

what’s lying in front of you, front, the first;
i ko mṳ̌ s be started first, is in front.

van(guard)

first work, new field to be worked;
bo tso sṳfà’ they start new work;

firstling, beginning, first fruits

su̯mbìyaṅ, n. first crop of groundnuts; ni; sṳ̯mbiyaṅ at the time

sṳ̯nù, n.
sṳ̯ṅ, n.
sṳ̌n, v
syṳ̯ṅguù̀ṅ, n.
sṳṅgwiì, n.
suṳṅkò’, n.

sṳ̍ṅntsi, n.
su̯ṅṅkà’, n.

sṳ̀ṅti, v.

suṳṅu̯, V.

of the first groundnuts.
beginning of something, of a process, etc.
a sparrow
sharpen, whet, polish, rub; destroy, uproot;
ù Iǐn mà s̤ṅ muyńi, à tso̤’ e ?’ can you whet a knife, so
that it becomes sharp? bo ṅkù mab nd bo, ṅgǒ̤
bab tohey shook the dust off their feet and leftt;
bo ndàli they smoothened the claybed;
i mbènndab they smoothened the mud on the nvall;
à lun ns̤ṅ it’s full to the brim; § beati,
first crop of Indian corn
partridge: § (̇gaṅso̤̍ṅ
first cock crowing in the morning
crane, waterfowl

small grasshopper

consume, wipe off, dust, scratch off;
i so̤̍ṅti kṳ̍kaṅ ko’ he cleared his throat in vain.

turn quickly, whirl, revolve rapidly ;
nsi ni nsyṅṳ y, ni ndza̤muṳ ńìm the earth itself turns
and is revolving around the sun.

sù̯sùṅ
sù̯sṳ̯, adv.
sù̯ù̯’, n

san :
§ sùsùṅ

forward, on; ndàùṅ yab ṅgo̤ so̤̍s̯ their number is
increasing

hiding place, dark corner;
nù le kǎ mà nazě ma so̤s̤̍’ bo̤ that thing did not
happen in a dark corner.

suṳs̯’(ṅka), n. the lower part of the raffia stalk

sù̯’, n
sù̯’, n

sṳ̯̌’, v

su̯’, n
su̯’ni, v.
sṳ̯ ṅgò’, n.

play, game; i ni ntad bo̤̍ s̤’ he is only playing; §

thickness, bulk; so̤̍’ i mà ṅgu’ bo̤ its thickness will
not increase; ; mà nd̤d bo̤, à dzà̯ mṳ̍ its size
is not heayv, it is light.

advise insistingly, exhort

cooperative work; § ns’

be terrible, be frightful; à sg’ni it is terrible;

yò mfàn le sg’ni ti that’s a terrible chief; yo (ńo le
suṳ̯’ni ti that is a dreadful snake; mà tfso sa’ mbò
i nto̤̍n a, ti to be judged by the living

God, is an awful thing.

termite sp.; § ns’ ko̤̍ko̤̍n, so̤’ṅgo’

suṳ ti koṅ, v. sob, hiccup; § ko̤ṅ

suu̯’̯, v.

swà, adv.

swǎběd, n.

swǎmùn, n.

remove, set down, reduce, lower, sink, pull down;

tune a song; sygy’̯ tfunmndab break down the roof;
lampud reduce the flame of the lamp;

dzɑǎb tune a song; i džb, ko̤ṅ, tsad he
tuned a lament and all started lamenting;

to yâ’, nsuṳ̯ na ni ṅkùm à come and lend me a hand
to take down my basket (from the head) ;

bo syṳ’̯ ṅgo̤̍’ mab they lower’ their cheeks, they look
sad; ǐ sṳ̯’̯ mbu̯n mṳ̍ṅgwi le she lowered’’ the breast.
of that woman = she makes her produce more milk by
rubbing in some medicine; bo kà su̯’̯ mfòn ni yn Ioṅ
they destooled the chief.

in vain, for nothing
big cowrie, used with the small ones in a game

pl. swǎbùn independent person; § mf̤ṅnimùn, γo̤ro̤’mùn

 

 

 

 

3; -
be stiff, be unmoveable; kù i swa§ his foot is
fear, horror, fright; swèd we yab horror struck them.
be fearful, be terrible, be awful;

i tsu nù le, à swèd mè, à tsà mbo what he said was
awful, it surpassed us; § swedka̤d

swèdkad, adj. terrible, awful, frightful; sweèdka̤d mùn a terrible

sweàèli, v.

swě’, v.

swè’ti, v.

sw, v.

swibo, nu.

man; swedka̯d nù an awful affair; § swǎd

frighten, impress a person strongly, exaggerate;

mà ntǎ’ mà sweli yin sweèli ni ṅwà’ni à bo l co not
want to frighten you with my letter; ù sweli a ni mb̌ṅ

fà’ u you frighten me with your lot of twins (said to

a person coming with a lot of people).

sink, slip down, turn off, subdue, waver, secede ;

i kà mà nswě’ nt̤̤̍ i nd bo̤ he did not turn away
his heart from God; ù swě’ kù u nadž̤m mù̯ you have
turned away your foot from following me, you are no
more of my party:; bi sw’ kù yin n; nù mboòṅkaa̤d you
turned away from the good way; à swe’ miyà = à Iǎb
miyà on(y a little is left; sw’ mo̤ the sun has
begun to set, about 3 p.m..

put back, place back, neglect, disregard, lower, humble,
reduce, put down, weaken, lessen, diminish, slacken ;

i swè’ti tst he made an unclear speech (using a low
voice and adding other things to it); ù swe’ti kǒdzid

you are slowing down the journey, you slacken the speed;
bi swe’ti madzo’ bimo’ ṅkù’mṳ bo̤ n ko e? compared with
other churches, in what way were you neglected?

i swe’ti ntan he is putting pressure on the market;

bi yè ko m ni ni nswe ti mbò ma e? vhat are
you doing with your weeping and weakening of my hands
(heart)?’ d mà nswe’ ti ndoṅ ṅwà’ni le e? will you not
reduce the price of this book? i bi tsě ma lṳ̤’, bo kà
swe’ti mbad, nngyṅti mbuṅ mǔ̯ a, bàsogè (sam i as you
reached the place where they had reduced the hill (by
digging) and had made steps, the soldiers carried him.

go down, step down; § ns wins wi

nine

swibòṅgam, nu. ninety

swin, v.

pull off (the best part of the palm leaf) ;

 

switi, nv;

swi’ni. v.

swiì’nì, adj.

z

i ni ntso’ nswi’, nswoh he pulls out the head of the
fibre and pulls it down through the fingers; § nswi’

investigate, search, explore; § witi-mvi

stroke, rub gently with the hand, caress; strike off,
massage, milk ;

i swì’ni l̤’ le ni pin he massages the (swollen) part of
the body with the fruit of the kigelia africana, in order
to relieve the congested organ;

i swi’ni mbùm i hae rubs off the water from his body
after washing himself; i ni nswi’ni ntońàm, mba̤d tum
he strokes the intestines, so that the excrements come
out; § san

empty, inadequate, ease, tasteless, thin;

i ma’ ndzi i bo̤ swi’ni he clothes himself insufficiently;
ù ku̯ nnaṅ nt le bo̤ swi’ni, nṳ̯ṅ m̌’ yum wu’ le, à
le’ni e? co you usually cook thin soup without putting
something in to make it stronger?

 

