 

23; -

ta, n. :insect

ta, pl. bàta father, used in compounds only;
tà Elisa (father of Elisa; tadu vwife’s father-in-law;
tamon, tabon (father(s) of a child;
bàtabon (fathers of several children.

ta, p. coref. for my part; mu s6 ta bini fà’ le kwà’ ni to̤n
I also, for my part, started the work intensively.

ta, sv. shine, light, glow, heat., scorch,;, live;
yǎ sàṅ ka ni nta noyo, star is still shining = my father
is still alive; ńm ni nta bùn mbuyka̯d sǎ teoe sun is
also shining on the wicked; tita ta ti pepper is very
hot.

tav push away, give up, shoot, kick at, sew;
nàmbà’niì ta i the horse kicked him; ta i, mmà’i i
kick him and leave him alone, give him up;
bo ta ntu’ they shoot at a target; i kà ca i ni ked
he shot him with an arrow; viko’ ta mg̤̍ the trap
snapped; i ta b̠̌m nsun i; lit. he shot his friend ’s belly;
he flung his middle finger against the belly of his friend
as a sign of a promise given not to tell the secret which
will, when not kept, swell or even burst the designated
belly; Fe ta bàmm Fe sews a bag.

ta, p. poss. l. sg., cl. S na; 1;̤m ta my tongue
tǎ, v. fly, squirt; à t, mv mγ̌ it saquirted and fell on it;
i tǎ ndoo̤ eae runs duickly.

tab, p. coref. 3. pl. on their turn;
a la biìmo’ bùn dzi tab mà f̤̍nimi’ boà bo s afterwards
some people in their turn also began to act false with
them.

tab, p. poss. 3. pl., cl. S their; ’g̤̍m tab their tongues
tab, n. pl. ntab (a-ma) boot, shoe, sandal
tab, n. drop; lo’ nn ibe’ ntsu’ tab mboṳ̍ṅ mà nts’ṳm masi bo̤

since the day before yesterday not a drop of rain has
fallen.

- 311 -
tàb, n. (indecent) father ;
n’ suṅ mbò tàb t teold our father;
i suṅ mb tàb be told the father;
la, i suṅ mb tà yàb bus, e told their father;
la, ù suṅ mbò tà yin, ṅgâ ko̤ e ? what did you tell their
father?
tabàbon § tabon
tǎbǎmbàlàṅ, n. kind of grasshopper , dragonfly
tabà̯d, n. ’father in the war’’, captain
tǎbbo, pl. (a-ma) forearm
tǎbkù, pl. ntǎbṅkù (a-ma) lower leg, calf
tabmbṳù̀ṅ, n. raindrop

tabon, n. pl. bàtabon father of several children; § tamon

tabon, n. pl. of tamon, also: tabàbon father of all children ( ho-
norary name

tabtòṅ, n. goitre; § ton

tàbuṳ̯, v. torment, worry, bore, vex; ù mùn mè mbi’ko̤ e?
why do you worry the man so much? S van, vi, buli

tàd, n. big pot
tad, n. plant, lily, arum lily
tad, v. treat, entertain; bo tad vin they entertained the people

who had worked, thatching the roof with grass;
i tad mbùm e teesds himself, he fattens himself.

tǎd, v. jump, hop, leap (in a game or play) ;
i ni ntad bo heis only playing; i td nd̤̀̍, he
overstepped the limit; § caso§̤û

tǎdmàndziì, n. pl. bàtǎdmàndzì van (guard), repairing the path for
warriors or people following; guide for the road; mediator,
trying to intervene peacefully; ambassador;
bo kà fuṅ mǎ ’ ta’ mùn madzo’ yγàṅṅkoòndum, ntsi’ i ni
tǎdmàndzi ṅgâ, bo me’ti sa’ le ni boni they called
one man from the enemy’s party and made him mediator,
so s to peacefully settle the strife between them.

 

 

 

- 31s -

tǎdndâṅgwa’, n. big pot, used to cook wine in (in the house of
the Ngwa’-society); bo bom ni; tsa’ they are made of clay.

tàdndù’, n. big clay pot for palmwine; § mbâṅndù’

tàdṅgṳ̀ṅ, n. clay pot to cook maize-pap, baker’s kneading trough
tàdṅkaṅ, n. clay pot for beer

tadu à, n. ny feather-in-law : father of my husband

tǎkadkâd, n. grasshopper sp.

tali, n. dining room for men, vestibule; § dzɑ̌aṅ

tam, n. pl. ntam feuit of a creeper or climber

tam, n. pit, hole, covered hole used as trap for wild beasts;
tam sisi black, terrible pit in the underworld.

tam, v. catch, prepare a trap, set a trap, lay out a net;
mon à tam làm nyy child lays out lime (to catch birds);
bo tam ndâm teoaey lay out a net (for partridge-driving)
bo tam màùn le teohey dusg a pit for the person;
i tam dz̤̀m she is pregnant (the first three months) ;
tam, dzǐ dzṳg prepare first, then eat.

tam, v. measure, survey, span, encompass ; provide with a curtain;
tam tsuṳ̯ndab sutrvey the foundation of the house;
tam yà’lǐ’ ndab nmeasure the frame of the house;
tam ṅgùm nmeasud re the frame for the roofing;
tam ty span a teree.

tambàṅ, n. sterile man

tambe, n. tree sp., its leaves are like those of the horse-chestnut,
the wood is hard.

tambì, n. pl. ntambi husk of the colafruit

tambi, n. husk of the cola-nut:;
tamṅgà’ husk of a kind of nut.

tambo, n. pl. ntambo (a-ma) measure of length one can span
between thumb and middle finger, about ? in.;
fathom the length one can span with two arms
stretched out, about ? yds.

tamkàù, n. pl. ntamṅkù (a-ma) peace, stride (distance of about

- 36 -

3 in. one stride)

n. knot in tubers of coco-yam (when left in the soil too
long, it starts developing shoots again).

tamkùko̤’, n. tree, the fruits of which serve as soap; if the fruit
is cut in two parts and placed on the road, the magic
animal (fnàm azi) cannot pass.

tamndzo, n. terick for tempting enemy or dupe to expose himself
to capture, defeat, failure, disgrace, loss; § bo̤̍ti

tamndzo̤ṅ, n. bell-swipe, strong beating of a bell; § nadzo̤ṅ

tamni, v. stand upright, be in a seated position, sit on a throne;
bṳ̍ to, ni ntsu mbo i, i kau̍ ntamni bi ni lon, kṳ̍ ko̤’ bo
we came and talked to him, but he only sat in posture
on his throne and did not respond.

tàmnsòn, n. fPfrog, (it’ toad); when rain falls it is thought to
fall from the sky, and when old turns into a poisonous
lizard.

tamntu’, n. a kind of slimy, slippery soup, made from a special
fruit; § ṅku

tamntsa, n. part of a rivulet dammed up to catch mud-fish
tamfṅga’, n. husk of a nat, shell
tàmon, n. pl. tàbon feather of a child; § mamon

tàmti, v. become fulfilled, happen, correspond;
à ci tàmti boo̤ it cooes not suit or correspond.

tamti, v. also: ta’ti straddle, being in a position with the legs
wide apart, stand or sit across like this; i tamcti ṅkù
mi ma màndzi hae straddles his feet across the way.

tamti, v. intend, plan, aim at, purpose, determine;
ṅ’ kà tamti ṅka ndzàmuṳ̯ ma to mbo bin I have often
intended to come to you; ; tfamti mà bad i bo̤ ni
ntsà̯m ba cesolved to divorce her secretly.

tamti, v. support, assist, lend a hand, lead by the hand;
bo to tamti i tamti to mǎ̯ they will lead her by the

hand to come; § tàmpy

tàmu̯, v. conduct, support when walking; ṅgukad le dzan tii,

 

 

tàn, v.

tàn, nu.

tǎn, v.

tǎndà, n.

Tândzì

tàndzù’, n.

tàni, v.

tani, v.

-

bo ti’ ni ntamuṳ̯ ni mà yγǒ̤ ni yi ma nda fù the old man
is very sick, they gave him support and took him to

the clinic; bo kà tàmy ba Ndàṅgàn, ṅgǒ̤ ni yi ma ndzàù’ i
they supported father N. and went to his home with him;
§ ta tamti

force (to do), press (through talking) ;
i tàn màùn le ṅgâ, i bim nù le heis forcing him to an

agreement.

five (when preceding the noun); tàn bùn five people;
§ itàn

stand, be or become stiff (of a corpse), cramp;
b i tǎn mṳ̍ his hand became stiff.

friend; § nsun

proper name for boys

head of the family n kindred

doubt, oppose, contradict, criticise, gainsay ;

i tàni nù hae doubts the matter; i tfàni fsù yab

he criticizes their word; § ntàni

throng, hunt (someone to work faster or walk faster)

tǎnṅgam, nu. fifty; boùn kà to yt’ fifty men came here.

tànti, v.

taṅ, n.

taṅ, v.

take a distance, enlarge the distance, esp. in gymnastics;
ma na bo̤, bà ctànti ntsǎ fe’ co nocet come near,
give us space.

ceiling (of the house); § kpgtàṅ, numtàṅ

itching eczema, caused by sandtflies ;
mbàùm ji taṅ me’ his body is covered with eczema.

number; tavṅ nswnswi odd number

count, tale, narrate, converse, bribe, arrange, plan;
taṅ ndab to get s.th. with the use of bribery;
bà to tarn ntsà̤̯m, mbi’ nɑ mà γǒ̤ ma Bamenda et
us talk secretly about going to Bamenda;

taṅ ndàm arransge a secret plan, gossip, slander;
taṅ ntsà̤m conspire; tàṅṅgàm tell stories, narrate,
talk about anything; §

bo taṅ nďṅ ṅkabfà’ they fixed the wages;

tǎṅ, v
Tâṅ
tǎṅbò’, n.
tǎṅgwi, n.

tǎṅndab, n.

taṅni, v.

tàṅti, v.

taṅti, v.
tàṅṳ, v.
tâńi, n. pl.
tapid, n.

tasṳ̯̀’, n.

tasuṳ̯̀’, v.

= .:

bo ni ntaṅ ntan they are trading;
taṅ kàsi click (with tongue and open mouth as a sign
of contempt); § n taṅ, taṅni

be tough, tenacious, clinch; yo ndzi tṅ ti this cloth
is very strong; i tṅ vu be has a tough life; mvi tṅ
ti mè sǎṅ dawn is delaying; § ntàṅkad, ntaṅnts̤̀m,
ntàṅtàṅ

proper name (for boy)
mushroom sp. (edible)
pl. bàtǎṅgwi feather’s sister, aunt, sister-in-law

ceiling, storey, floor, garret; ťṅndab big ceiling
(surmounting the housewalls and serving as a support
for the roof); § ntumtaṅ, ku̯tàṅ, motàṅ

quarrel, dispute, scramble; bo tav̇’ni nesi they quarrel
about water; caṅni wu’ be ambitious, strive for
greatness; § tav

lattice, actually the laths of raffia ribs, stems of strong
grass, ratan reeds, placed crosswise for the frame of the
ceiling, baskets, basket bottoms, frames to keep pumpkin
leaves off the soil, to preserve them as vegetables;

tàṅti ṅkùm tie a basket (with wide meshes of lattice
work); tavṅti tso̤̍ṅni ṅgònndo’ plait the bottom of some
kind of basket; bo ni ntaṅti sě tso̤̍ṅni ṅkn’ ni bubùṅ, bo
dzi lǎ ku̯sṳ̯ ni mba’ ni ndo̤ they also plait the bottom
of ṅki’ (a basket) with the pith of raffia ribs and go on
weaving with the rind of young raffia ribs; § ṅgòn

count; tanti kṳ̍ka’ mbiyaṅ a game; 3 tari

toughen (dough, paste)

bàtâńi father of twins

red inouse sp., with or without a short tail

play, game; y yum tas(o̤ vo m(̤̍ no, toy is lost;
ù mà ndìn mà kiti yoò nù le ndzo̤ nɑ̌ tas̤’ bo you

must not regard this as a plaything.

play, gamble, game; bi ma ni nɑ̌ bo̤
do not play with the affairs of God; § so̤’, td

 

 

tasù’tǎd, n.

tàti, n.

tàti, adj

tati, v.

tati, v.

tatòṅ, n.

tǎtsì, n.

su -

skipping game

frame (hanging above the fireside, used to dry pepper
and other things)

dry

jump, leap, skip; bon ni ntati ma laṅndzǐ’ ṅwà ni
the children jump about in the school yard.

spice, season, prepare soup, stir; fati kědzṳ spice food;
bo ni ntati ntò bo̤ ni t’ṳ̯ ntò they stir the soup with a
big spoon; bo ni ntati k’ skǎ ni t̯ ntò teohaey also stir
the fufu with a big spoon;

bo ni ntati ntò ni tsi boà tita mbo̤ ṅgwa̤d s they
prepare the soup with salt, pepper and oil.

small bird sp. with feathers of different colours, long
beak; it prefers the fruits of the wa-tatoòn.

cricket (a jumping chirping edible insect);

ni ntoṅ, ni mfuṅ vu ṅgâ, à to, ṅkwa̤d i (Pr.)

the cricket is chirping and calling death to come and
chop it;

m’ bo̤ ni mfuṅ vu ṅgâ, à to (ṅkwa̤d a = n’dzǒ̤ bùn,
bo nda, ni mfuṅ yab i̇gâ, bo to, bu à bo tsa’ti; bo to,
bu̯à bo tsà’ti, bo γâ, m’fa ndù’, bo no, n’suṅ ṅgâ, ndù’
mà mbog, bo yâ, à Iǎ’ mfuṅ wù’, mfuṅ y’, fa ndù’; n’dzun
ndù’, mfa bo; le bo ṅgâ, m fuṅ vu, à to, ṅkwa̤d a, yǎ
ṅkab vo̤ mṳ̍, mbi’ ndù’ le l am a cricket calling for

death to come and eat’ me -= I see how people pass by,

tbli, v.
t̤bṳ, V

I call them to come and exchange greetings; they come
and we greet one another and they say, I should give
them palmwine to drink; I reply that I have no wine, but
they say, it is you who called us; give us winel I bought
wine and gave it to them. This is the meaning of the
proverb.

tǎtsi bǒ̤ ntoṅ, bùn yu’, ṅgǒ̤, ṅgw, nto, ṅkanṅ, ṅkwad;
muńàṅgob ni ndze sě bub, kṳ̤̤ kaṅ bo̤ = tǎtsi fuṅ vu

when the cricket chirps, the people listen and go and
catch them, roast and eat them; the cat does the same,
but without roasting them. This is how the cricket

calls death.

do s.th. inexactly, work carelessly ;
tbli tsu speak incorrectly; tà̤bli fà work carelessly.

lead astray, mislead, confound;
d ni nti’ ntabuṳ̯ na, mbi’ ko̤ e, ù yâ, m’ fa yò yum, mbi

ta̤mṅgo’, n.

t̀mti, v.

=

fa, ù kù’ mbǎd why do you confound me, you ask
for that thing and when I give it to you, you refuse;
§ boli, vàṅuṳ

shoot, throw, strike against, box; spit, click, sob, offend;
nt’ shoot at a mark; gàṅ shoot at a target;
ya shoot (with spear) through a triangle, made
with a forked stick; ta̯m bo ni ṅgǒ̤’ mùn box one’s ear;
tam nti ndǐ̌ mùn spit saliva at a person; § nti;

i ta̯m kà i ni lanwo he struck his foot against a rock;
i tam kù i mùn le he is offended by this man;

tam yo’ ni yum le eager for a thing; i dzy, ndza̤d, à
tam i be has eaten too much and is unable to go on;
ta̯m bèd play dice; § bsd;,

bo tam tufò, nnǎn ni ntsa’ ṅgâ, mbo̤̍ṅ ma ndǎ wu’,
fà’ bo they filled the furrow with soil to stop rain-
water passing through there and washing away the bed;
ta̤m ṅkṳ̯d smack with the tongue (sign of contempt) ;

§ taṅ kàsi; i tam sàγo̤’ = ku̯̍o̤’ ta̯m i bia sobs, has
hiccups; ńùm ta̤m ndo̤ṅ it is noon, lit. the sun is shooting
raffia leaves; tà̯m ndab plaster the wall with mud;

tam sen ni moǎ’ nù drive force into a matter, make it
worse; mfàòn suṅ nù mbo bo, à ta̤m yab teohe chief spoke
with them, it offended them; k ntan ta̤m a my goods
lost their normal price; i ta̤m mi’ mi, ndzo̤ i be looked
for him and found him.

plait, knit, braid, twist, wind round

tam nsi tab knit stockings; tà̤m tsàlà’ plait a kind
of bag; i tam (̇g he plaits one round of the
(grass-made) basket; bo tam lo’ ni mfa they trim the
calabash with glass beads; bà e tam yǎb kad ni nswi’
ndzwěnndzwen the people of Ve plait the bases of
their calabashes with bast; nswi’ ndzwěndz wen twisted
fibre, used for chair-seats; § t̤̀ mti, kṳ̍kad, nta̤mni

pl. tǎ̌mṅkù calf (of the leg)

see one another; tamni mbǎṅmi’ see again with eyes,
come across person again;

à lo’ni mṳ̍ ndzǒ̤ bà mà nta̤mni mbǐ̌ṅmi’ bo̤ a time passed,
since we met; n’ dzu’ ṅgâ, mon à kà kwe mat m̀

ni ṅgo̤ tam mbǎṅmi’ ma nd i I have heard that my son
has returned from the coast, I am going to meet him.

also: naṅṅgo’ small hole where termites come out of

join, stitch together; t̤̯mti Iǐ̌’ tsi join the resting place,
the same bed (decent expression for sexual intercourse ;

 

 

taàmti, v.

ta̤mtu, n.

t̤mtsitsa’,

= 3; -

t̤̀mti ṅgoṅfà’ join the beds of the garden, (so that the
furrows are no more visible); t̯̀,mti ntsù unite in a
case, in speaking; fa’ mùn ńin madzo’ bùn mommorm ti
tsi’ ntṳ̯m mà t̤̀mti boà bo bo̤ nct one of the outsiders
dared to join them; § tfa̯m

plaster often, throw against, shoot, trample;
bo tamti i ni wo they stoned him.

grippe, influenza; § ko̤dzà’̯ndab

n. cricket that does not chirp (it hollows the raffia ribs)

tà’, n. also: tà’ndùṅ snail

tav.

ta’, nu.

ta’ bo, adj.
ta’ kù , adj.
t’ le, cj.

take off (of honey); i γǒ̤ ta’ dù he went to get honey;
but: i γǒ̤ ta’ dù he went to find honey.

one (never used independently): le ta’ this one only;

ta’ Fa ńin one frank; ta’ tu à uauite alone;

bo tsi ta’ tu yàb they are standing quite alone (every-
one of them); i yo ta’ I ’ he sees with the twinkle of
an eye; ta’ wàṅ ńin bo̤ bùn ikwaà, ta’ wàrṅ ńin bo̤ bùn ik wà
each group consists of four men.

seek, search, fetch, wish, intend, like, please, be willing;
n tǎ, yunm, à kaà. vo̤ a. look for s;th. lose;

i t’ bo b̤̍’ he is just looking for us; t’ bùn ni bd
begin war against people; ù t’ ṅgâ, n’ dze ko̤ e?’ what
do you want me to do?

tǎǐ’ as an aux. v. is always followed by maà; be about to,
be on the point of: i t’ mà ku he is on the point of
death; i t’ mà vi she is on the point of giving birth;
màùn le tǎ mà dzuy tuyàb iba this man tries to get two
portions (one different to the other); § cà’ni

one-handed, one-armed
one-legged, one-footed; bo i γǒ̤ ta’ ku they go together.

never mind, surely, now, indeed; but;

yò mùn mà ndzi’ti titi bo̤, tǐ’ le i ni ndze nù mbàṅka̤d
this man is not very clever, but never mind, he does
good work; t le ṡ’ ṅwaà’ni nt̤’ mfi mbò bin sě
yet, I have written to you, what is a new command;
tǐ’ le, kǎ f̤d ba, n’ dǐ’n ṅgâ, bi kà y nù le bo̤ ni
mbu’ now I know, my brothers, that you acted in
ignoorance.

ta’ li’, adj.
tà’muy, v.
tà’ndùṅ, n.
tà’ ni, v.

ta’ni, v.

tati, v.

ta’ti, v.

ta’ti (màndzì), n. street corner, branching of roads

ted, nu.

tedṅgam, nu. thirty; § itèd

tèli, v.

=3 :

one-eyed

support (a person in walking), conduct; § tàmy

snail
quarrel (about goods given on loan), doubt; § cx’

rub in, paint; bànǎ kǎ nta’ni kù i ni; fù = bànǎ kǎ nta’ni
fù ni kù i the nurses rubbed his foot with liniment;
bo ta’ni i ni ṅgwa̤d kè b̤̤̍ they rubbed him with oil
or camwood powder-.

intens. form of t’: root up, scrape, scratch, paw, dig;
ṅgob ni nta’ti ntsà’ the hen is scratching the soil;
ta’ti tṳ̯ mà nuyṳṅ mvà’ wu’ dig up round the tree,
in order to deposit the refuse there; ta’ti mu’ look
for fire (in the ashes); § wa’ l

straddle, part (legs or arms) widely;
i tati ṅkù mi be straddles his legs; § ya’ti, nfa’, tamti

smooth, polish, glide, slip, slide, lick inside of pot
with finger; daub with, paint, besmear, be slippery ;

ńo ni nte mà màndzi the snake is gliding on the road;
tě titòb besmear with mud; es fomm daub vith chalk;
bi bǒ̤ ndzě bub, mbǒ̤̍ bofà bi ti tǎà mv bo̤ if you do
this, you will never slip and fall; nǐ t ntò the mother
takes some vegetables from the pot; § ntèàlika̯d

three (when preceding the noun)

;

nǔ ted yàb me’ bo̤ ńin all the three are one; § ited

remain, rest; i kǒṅ mà td bi wu’ he preferred to
abide there;

as, v. aux. (follewed by the prenas. form of the verb):
already; in neg. phrases: not yet;

i těd ṅgwa’ nsùn i le wa’ e? did he give up his friend ?
i mà ntěd nto e?’ has he not come yet ?

i mà ntěd ṅwà’ni bo̤ hae has not written yet;

i td nto e?’ has he already come? rgo’, ṅwà’ni těd
ntso e?’ what, school has already started ?

make or be smooth, slippery; smoothen, colour;
mbùm mon le ni nteli tèl’i the body of this child is

 

 

ten, v.

teni, v.
tenikad, v.

teti, v.

ti, adv.

- 3; =

smooth (without pimples) ;

m̤̀ ni nteli laṅndab ṅgâ, à teli; l’ le tè ti, n’ t mo̤̍ wa’,
mv masi I smoothen the courtyard, so that it is even
or level; the place is very smooth; I have slipped there

and fallen; § ntèlikad

run off, away; flee, fly, escape; bo ten dzadzàdza
they run in one line at the same speed.

intens. form of ten: run off again and again
run off (many people or often)

elect, select; teti bàùn itèd, bi mboòṅka̤d choose five
good people.

very, much (used only with verbs of state); mùn le wu’
ti this man is very big; n’tsàṅti ti I am very pleased.

ti, p. coref. on his part, just he himself; i sěti γ̌ be (on his part)

ti, p. poss.

ti, neg.

ti, v.

goes.
ss g ens ns nen

particle (denoting subordinate clauses with a new subject
always with bo̤ at the end of the neg. phrase; it is placed
between subject and verb) ;

Nchinda kà mà ṅkwe ku̯ndzù’ bo̤, mfa̤d i ti kwe sě bo

N. did not return home, neither did his brother ;

bofà ù ti γo̤̤ ma ntan bo̤ you are not to go to the
market; used also after bofà not possible.

spit, spot, stain, blow some spittle through the lips;

ti fom ni tukùm make spots on the dancing mask with
Gchalk; maà ti mùn ni fo̤Im to paint white spots on the
body of a man; § nti

ti tense marker to denote the continuous future (also used (also

tid, n.
tika̤d taksi
tikwa’, n.

used in imperative followed by the prenas. form of the
verb); ei ṅwà’ni, mfa mu ṅgàb ni (̇gàb write
a letter to me every week; bo la’ ti ntu’ ṅkab with
it they will be gaining money.

small worms, maggots, mites; § dump, ńomńom

tax receipt

toy for young girls; thorny shrub with globular fruits

- 31 -

tin, p. coref. 2. pl. only you, on your part;
bin sě tin nti just you also will become
witnesses.

tin, p. poss. ?. pl., cl. S your

tisòṅ, n. governmental office, military post, station, officers
residing there

tità, n. pl. bàtiìtà honorary name for grown-up sons of the chief,
also for important servants of the chief and other men
of importance from other families; they have no special

service; tità bd commander-in-chief, general.

tita, n. pepperplant, pepper fruit; also: tree sp. (with strong
wood )

titàmntsì, n. swamp, swampy soil or ground; § ntso’
bofà od ti dzid madzi titǎmntsi bo̤ you cannot walk
on swampy ground.
titamù̯kali, n. big yellow and green pepper fruit
titam̯kwèn, n. red, dried pepper fruit with an elongated shape
titi, adv. very much (redupl. form of c;)
titi, v. strike against, hit at; i citi tso’ a he hit my wound.
titombiìyan, n. groundnut with watery contents
titòb, n. swamp, morass, mire, marsh, bog;
kuńàm ňṅ ma titòb the pig lies in the mire;
ù dzo’ ndzi à ni titòb, mbi ko̤ e?’ why do you besmear
my clothes with mud? cs cito plaster with mud.
titò’, n. boil, tumour, swelling, swollen tonsils
titò’, n. toad; only eaten by Moghamo people, not by Bali people.
titsà, n. pl. bàtitsà (Engl.) teacher
titsa’mbàṅ, n. waste matter; § tsitsa’mbàṅ
titswe, n. also: tsitswe small, inedible caterpillar
( last, happen, meet, appear, become; turn into;

à ti’ ni bo it is at hand; à t;’ miyà = à Iob miyaà
only little remains (there); n γǒ̤ nti’ i he went to see

 

=-33jB: =

him; i ci’ ṅgàṅ-ntan be became a trader; i ci’ ṅǧ̤ṅṅgoṅ
ndzo̤̍ ba i ea as become like his father;

ù bǒ̤ nngṅ tṳn ma mu’, à nti’ bàṅbàṅ if you put
iron into the fire, it will turn red;

bu ù t̤̀mti, nti’ nù ńin we join and form a union;

à ti’ ndǎ’ wo̤ bàṅ à le e?’ who took my vwalking stick?
yò ndzindzi ti’ mbo̤ i ko ma ndab e’? vhat is this fly
doing in the room? ti’ yǎ ṅwà’ni o le, ka ba

make sure to post this letter of mine, father;

i la’ ti’ yo bo ni mfommvi he will go but tomorrow:
§

to; v: come; i mà ntěd nto bo̤ hae did not come yet:
i be’ ni nto heis just arriving there; bo to nn tumbùm
yab teoey come by themselves.

to, tense marker to denote future tense of today: u to yo (̇go̠’ ṅkun,
dzi lǐǔh you will undergo trouble, before you know;
a to mbo̤ mandz;̤̀m it vill happen later in the day;
a to boòṅṳ mà y it will happen soo; § ntoto

tom, n. support, aid, assistance

tom, v. assist, support, aid; kà wǎd nd̤ṅ, ntom f(̇k̤̍ndoòṅ mṳ̤̌
ṅgâ, à mà mv bo cut some palmribs and supported
the pisang with them, so that it would not fall; § tod

tommu’, n. hearth-stone, the stones on which the pot is placed
above the fire

tomndab, n. pl. ntomndab post of the house, pillar;
Fe bo̤ tomndab mb gd i, i bo s ntom ma
nda iikòb Feis the pillar of his family; he is also
a pillar in the congregation of the house of God.

tomni, v. support one another

tomṅkù̯ndòṅ, n. pl. ntomṅkuṳndoṅ support for a bunch of bananas

tomtàṅ, n. pl. ntomtàṅ support for a ceiling

tomti, v. intens. form of tom

tɑǒ̌òn, v. be or become hot, fierce, vehement., strong, important;
burn, roast, toast; tǎn mbiyaṅ roast groundnuts;
b̤̍ tǎn ṅgwàfṳd miyà, ṅkwa̤d, ndzi yǒ̤ ṅwà’ni we roasted
some Indian corn, ate it and then went to school;

bo kà tǎn ntà̤̯d they burnt the chief’s compound;
bo tǎn kěǎě be ma mu’ they burnt those things in the

- 3Ss6 -

fire; tǎn lum bourn the grass for driving partridge;

bo ton a = bo dzu’muy na they eat me aut of the house;
l’ tǎn mè itis so hot; fà’ tǎn ein the work is very
hard; mbà’ntsi tǎn t it is a very rapid current;

mbà’ntsi rapid current; nesi ṅgṳ̯ river; ntsi ṅko̤’ brook;
à tum ma sa’ntsi the brook starts from the source;

b̤̀d le toǎn ti the fight was veuy fierce; i tǎn ni’ n bûwi
he is very keen on women; § tǎnntgṳ̯m, ntònka̤d, bab, k,
ntsob ntònton

adj. irritable, easily provoked; § toǎn

tònti, v.
tab, v
tobnì, n
tobnì, v.
tòbti v.
tod, n.
tod, v.

roast, toast, burn; fonti fà’ burn the grass on the
farm-bed

stir (with ladle, etc.), mix, worry, bore, vex, torment;
bo bǒ̤ ntǎ’ mà tam ndab, bo tcob ntsa’ when they want

to plaster the house, they mix mud; § vaṅṳ

torture, agony, torment; ; tobni mà vi she was in
the pangs of delivery; § varṅṳ

torture, torment

stir, mix, join; todbti ndzi sew together (diff. kinds of
clothes ); todbti ndù’ mix cold wine with warm:

support; tfod(̇gǒmndab roof-truss, trusspost

support, keep (up); tod mon support a child; § tom

toγṳ̯̀, n. also: toγṳ̯̀sǔ’ garment worn by the men of Bali

tòṅ, n.

tòṅ, n.

toṅ, n.

toṅ, n.

(ta-ma) navel, umbilical cord; ;

tòṅ ta bo̤ ma Tarso ny navel string is burried at
Tarsus, I was born at Tarsus.

lust, desire, appetite, eagerness, delight, wish, demand;

ù yě tòṅ nd yò mṳ̀ṅg wi your lust goes after this woman;
ťṅ ǐ ni ndo’ti mà dzṳ̯ yò kě his eagerness mislead him
to eat these things; od esi’ tǎṅ ù ni; yumdz;y, yi, ù yo, kṳ̀
mà dzy bo̤ a you direct your appetite to food, you
can see, but not eat; ; ku toṅ he dies of lust; § vo’,
ntâtòṅ

cave, cavern, hollow, excavation

palate, throat, gorge, pharynx; toṅ i mh his throat is
husky, he is retching; § motoṅ, tǎbtoṅ

 

 

toṅ, v.

toṅ, adv.

v.

-

cry, crow, blow, pipe, whistle, quaver with tongue;

i toṅ yab ni kab he vhhistles with his hand;

toṅ sa’ shout of joy (when’ men return victoriously) ;
toṅ sa’ ṅgònndam shout of joy when the bride is
brought to her bridegroom; i tofṅ ṅg wen he pipes;
toṅ ntàṅ blow a trumpet; § toi lo’, ṅgàṅ-toṅ-ndoṅ

very high up, straight up in the vertical; à ko’ mè ťṅ
it is ascending straight up; § eòṅni, ntoṅtoṅ

be eager for, be lascivious; mà tǎṅ ṅkab bo yi,
ṅgòṅ mbom nù mbykad me’ ni ntu’ti wu’ a love of
money is the root of all mischief; ù tǎṅ bo̤̍ ko̤ ndz
ṅg̤̍ e?’ what are you eager for the flesh of a leopard
for?

toṅ-biìṅti-ṅkṳ̀̀, n. hollowed piece of wood, used to set a trap

toṅdù, n.
toṅlo̤’, n.
tàòṅni, v.

beehive, made from a hollowed trunk of a tree; § dù
broken calabash, used as musical instrument; § Io’, toṅ

reproach a person, make fun of one; tower above, reach
or be high; nazi kà dzaṅ a ṅkù’ tit, Mutsiya lò’ kědzṳ̤
bi, ni ntoṅni a k fa yà bo̤ yesterday I was very
hungry, M. took his food and was making fun of me
without sharing some with me; g nťṅtòn, toṅ

toṅni nto̤m, v. call aloud (from far off); bo ni ntoṅni ntò̤m u

they call aloud for you.

toṅ ṅgwen, v. pipe, play on the flute, whistle with the mouth

toṅtoṅ, n.
mn:

tòṅṳ, v.

cudgel, stick, club, pole, perch, stake, bar, rod
hollow in a tree

stretch, make long; i toòrṅṳ tù i he stretches his head
forward; i toṅγ mbùm i be stretches himself, to reach
out to hand s.th. over.

hole; to’ bàm hole in the bag; to’ ndzi hole in a cloth.

vessel, box, tin-box: to’ b̤ vessel for camwood;

to’ fù medicine box; fo’ γo part of calabash, used as

a ladle: to’ ked aduiver; to’ l̤̯̀ m small shell of pumpkin,
with bird-lime, serving as bird-trap; to’ lo̤’ calabash;

to’ mboṅka̤ d ni mu’ madzi i censer; to’ tuṅ hole made
in the earlobe for an earring.

to’

to’

to’

to’

bù, n
fù, n
:’,
ked, n.
làm, n.
lo’, n.
mi’, n;

- sgj§js: -

pierce, perforate, break through, clear up (affair) ,

burst out (with laughter);

bo to’ sě ntsù ṅko̤’ṅko̤’ itàn bà’bà’, dzǐ ndab le lan

they also made five small openings on either side, so
that the room became bright inside;

to’ màndzi open up a way (lit. and fig.); bo ni mfuṅ
ṅgòṅ bon-bgṳ̯mbàṅ me’, bi, bo ni nto’ màndzi a, ni kě6è Tità
they call every male who opens the womb consecrated
to the Lord; to’ nsànsan publish, make known, give
notice, announce; to’ nù betray, make public (an affair) ;
à b̌ṅ bo to’ yò nù it is good to publish the matter;
yo nù to’ my ̇kańin this affair suddenly became public;
to’ γ̤̍ burst with laughter; bo yg to’ mi’ they are
partial; to’ ntsùò provoke appetite; to’ tf’ hew”notch
a post or tree; Io’ to’ mǔ̯ it dawvns, the first light of
the day; to’ ko̍ṅ butrst into tears; § nto’ntsù

fix, stop, finish, insist on, come to a standstill ;

ť’ tù u ni nù le, n’ suṅ mbò ? a, k̤̍ là’ni bo̤ stick to
what I have told you, and do not forget it;

bo tǒ’ kù yab ni Ǐ̤’ bd they fixed’ their feet in the
battlefield, they did not give way; i ku ntǒ’ kù i ṅgâ, a
mà bo̤ he insisted on the fact that it was in-

sufficient; tǎ̌’ vu end the mourning ceremony;

§ kom tau vu; i to ť’ bàṅ, fo she vill come, walking
slowly with a stick; § to’ti, toni, ťǎ kù

vessel for camwood
vessel for medicine
calabash, cut as ladle

quiver; i nug̯ṅ ked madzi to’ked kaà to’ ṅgàṅ-ged
he puts the arrows into the quiver.

small shell of pumpkin, with bird-lime, serving
as trap

calabash
partiality; mà ni ndze nù bi ni; to’ mi’ bo

God does not act upon his affairs with partiality; God
is no respecter of persons.

ndab, n. opening in the wall, window

ndà̤̀, v.

split up young raffia ribs; § ndo̤

 

to’ ndù’, v. tap palmwine; i ni nto’ nd’ ṅka kè mbù’
he is tapping wine from the raffia vinifera or from
the bigger kind of raffia; nù ku̯sṳ bo mà to’ ndàù’, ndziti
ni ndo̤ṅ ndù’ kè mà so̤ ndù’ the first thing is to pierce
the bottom of the raffia, then to tap ( to fix a pot and
channel the vine into it).

toni, v. tickle

to’ni, v. clear out, clean; toni ntuṅ mùn open the ears of s.o.;
bi to’ni ntùṅ min, ndzu’’ clean your ears and listenl
to’ni nù le, nsuṅ a investigate the matter and tell me.

to’ti, n. pl. of nto’ti trusspost, rafter, brace, spier; § nto’ti, wa’tiṅgùm

ta’ti, v. come to a standstill, finish; mùn le kǒ’my, nto’ti = i
to’ti mg̯̍ he is grown-up (now); sa’ in mg̯̍ he has
reached his full length; baṅ Noa kà to’ti kuṳtu mo’ mbad
ma ararat Noah’s ark came to a standstill on the
mountain of rarat.

pierce, explain, publish, pose as judge (unlawfully);
i bi’ni mà toti mb bo ndzo̤̤. nù le kà dzǐd a be started
to explain, how things had come to pass;
toti lo’ mùn publicize the deficiency of a man’s character:
Mose Mytsiya kà dzǒ̤ mbi Ndibab̌§̇a γo, nto ti
Io’ Mose M. mbà F. Moses M. stole a goat from F.,
Ndibaboṅa went and told Fokako of Moses’ theft;
toti explain the meaning; toti k̤̍ka’ make a
case (big or small) of raffia ribs; toti o’ pierce a
calabash; § sancti

tǒ̤, v., bend down, press down; f̤̍f̤d kà tǒ̤ tu the wind pressed
down the tree; tg’̤̌ ṅgo̤ = to̤ màndzi bend down the
grass in order to pass; § to’̯, ṅgo

to̤, v. to rub with; i fabsuṅ ni tu Fe ṅgâ, i dz̤ mbi be lies
that Fe has stolen a goat; i to i ni; mba̤d he rubbed
him with excrement.

tod, v. be or become proud, impudent, insolent, overbearing;
§ kp̤̍to̤d
to̤m, n. witness, spy; § nto̤m

to̤mma ,, interj. no, on my part; to̤mmi no, on her part, used
esp. by women

to̤mnsṅ, n. woodcock, wood partridge

 

to̤n, n.

36: -

palmtree

to̤nmbàṅ, n. oailpalm (elaeis guineensis ); fo̤nmbàṅ ni nsa’ tu

toṅkà’, n.

to̤nmbàṅ sa’ mbǐṅ à bàṅ; Iǎ, ṅko̤̍ndàòṅ le sa’ mu, ṅky
the oilpalm has reached its height and beacs fruit;

the oilpalm is tall, the fruits are red; but the bunch
from the pisang is long and ripe; § kuku’ton

bird sp., (small, grey, peeping loudly and monotonously)

to̤n-ńìkòb, n. palmlike plant with fernlike fronds (alsophila

to̤ṅni, v.

to̤ṅṳ, v.

to̤’̯̀, v.

tu, n.

camerounensis); everyone may use it in building a house;
the stem is termite-proof; à tn, syṅò’ ma ndǐn mà
kwad i bo it is strong, the termite cannot eat it.

be or become bent, stand or be awry, oblique;

fig. be incorrect; tu toṅni ti you speak incorrectly ;
ndab le toṅni mṳ̍̌ = a mà ntsini bo̤ the house is sloping,
it is not upright.

make wry, bend, be oblique; ; toṅṳ̤ tù i he bends his
head; toṅṳ̯ tsu make the speech unclear, esp. the
structure of the sentences; § ntoṅntoṅ, nto̤ṅnika̤d, nto̤’nto’

stand or become oblique, turn on one side;

to̤’̯ γum ma màndzi turn the thing out of the way;

bo ntùṅ mab ni nù’, à bi a they turn their ears to
the truth; bo ńa’ nto̤’̯ ma maàndzi; they swerved from
the path somewnhat; i to̤’̯ sa’ nď ù, nnuy̯ṅ ndɑǐ̌ mǎ’ mùn
he turned the case away from you and took it to another
person; i to̤’̯ y he gets away, he avoids the affair;

bi ma nto’̯̌ kù yin bo̤ do not turn away from your way,
do not give way; § ṙgo̤

(a) head; i no tù a he is riding on me;

tù a ̌’ nù they are troubling me from evertry side;

§ tubo, tubà’, tufà’, tuko’ tukùm,
tukù’’, tfumbàṅ, tfumbàm, tumuytàè. tfundab, tundzi, tunswi ,
tuntsi, tuṅgo̤ṅ, tuṅù, tus, tuta’ti, tuvu, γ’ro̤’tu, yotu,
m̌ṅtu, sǎd, etc.

tu, p. poss. ?. sg. cl. S your; tu bo wo̤ e? what is your name?

tu, p. coref. 2. sg. you, on your part

v;

pour in(to), e.g. dry goods, like corn;
i 1ǎ’ ṅgwàfṳd, ntǐ madzi bàm he took maize and poured
it into a bag.

 

 

 

36 -

tɑ̌, v. add much; i t ṅg wa̤d ni; yum dzy le be added a lot of
oil to the food.

tubo, n. upper arm

tubù’, n. pl. ntubù’ corner; tub̌’ ndab tohe corner of the house;
tub̌’laṅndzù’ corner of the compound; § tu

tubǔ’dzo̤ṅ, n. pl. ntumb̌’ndzo̤ṅ (ta-ma) hip, hipbone
tubǔ’ṅka’, n. pl. ntubu’ṅka’ corner of fence

tud, v. give, pose (riddle), tell tales, narrate fables ;
tud ṅgwen buṅku’̯ ku ’mù n; mǎ’ ndzù’ ṅgṳṳ, ni ntud (̇g wèn
the little folk gather in a big compound to tell tales;
§ ng wen ntudtud, ndzàbtidzòbti

tufà’. n. part of work assigned to a person or a group; task;
y̌ tufà’ teacher bo̤ ko̤ e?’ what is your work as a teacher?

§ tu

tuγ̌àb, n. portion, share, interest; mùn le tǎ’ mà dzy tuyàb iba
this man wants to receive two shares, he wants to
profit on both sides, even though the two parts exclude
one another; y tuγàb bo̤ ko̤ e?’ what is my portion or
task? § (̇gàṅ-dzṳ-tuyγàb, mbù’ z, tu

adv. only myself: used to emphasize nouns ;
a la’ ku̯ vo̤ tukǒ’ baṅ only the ship will perish (no man);
tukǒ’ nù, ka no’̤ a, bo̤ ṅgâ, b ṅkoṅni bò ni bàò
the most important thing God has commanded is, that
we should love one another; i bo̤ fsu yn bub bo̤ mbi’
tukǎ’ mbùm i hae said this only with regard to himself.

tukùm, n. mastk for dancing; § tu
tukù’, n. pl. ntuṅkù’ (ta-ma) knee; § tu

tum, adj. other, strange, foreign; motum, foreigner;
ṅgòṅtum foreign country, foreign town.

tum, v. send off, come out of, rise above, surpass ;
i tum mùn be became taller than others;
ntsu ù tum ti your mouth sticks out very much,
you are blurring out everything;
m̍ṅgwi d le tum ban. le bo (̇gâ, i y ̤̌ ma ndž’ ba i, ni
nnoṅ wu’ titin, ndu ùǐ to, ndǎ’ i this woman leaves;
she goes back to her family and stays there, until her

husband comes to fetch her back again (this is only

-. -

possible, if he brings some wine and other gifts to
reconcile her with); § ntum

tumbàṅ, n. bunch of oilfruits; fruitstalk of the oilfruit; § tu

tumbàùm, n. head of body’ with p. poss.: self, even; ni tumbom ;
of itself; tumbùm a I myself; tumbùm u you yourself;
tumbùm i he himself; etc.; yo Ioṅ bo̤ n tumbùm mfoòn
this chair belongs to the chief himself, personally;
i suṅ nù le mbi’ tumbùm i kè mbi’ m’ mùn e? does he
speak about himself or someone else?’ baàba bo ni
tumboɑ̌̌m bo our fathers and we ourselves; § mboàùm, tu

tumka̯d, v. swarm out; § tum
tumṅgum, n. subuaued village

tumtùm, n. foreign country; ndzi; mvǐ̌ tumtùm famine broke out
in different countries; bo ni mfinti yab tumtùm they
sell them abroad; bo nǒṅ tumtùm they stay abroad.

tumu̯tè, n. bleeding of the nose; tumgtè tum ma ta blood
(from the head of a small mouse = comes out
of ny nosse; (it is believed to be the result of eating
the head of the this is actually a little mouse which
is usually eaten, but for some people its head is dangerous;
formerly everybody ate it); Fomutu kà yγ̤̌ ma (nṅgwan,
mbiàṅti mytè, ṅgwě, ntǎn, ntuṅti ni; ka̯̍kà’, ṅkwe, mfa ba
n?’ ba i kà tsaàṅti, ntsǒ̤’d mǒ’ k̤̀nti ndzi, ṅgwe’ ni tso̤ṅni
Fomutu F. went to the bush and trapped that little
mouse; he then returned with it, roasted it and put it
on a stick and brought it to his father; his father was
happy and tied a piece of cloth around F.’s waist; § tu

tùn, adj. not cooked thoroughly; ton k’ colocasia not cooked
properly; ndzi kà dzaṅ mon le titi, i kwa̤d k’ the

boy was very hungry and ate half-cooked colocasia.

tundab, n. roofing of house: tundab kimni the roof sits on the
house very well; § eu

tundzi, n. train (of robe); dza’ti tundzi màùn or: fundzi mùn
seduce a married woman; § tu

tundzi dzàbdzàb fringed tassels which are put on garments
tunswi’, n. beginning (or: end) of raphia fibre; § tu

tuntsì, n. weall (of river). upper part of river, stream; § tu

 

 

= 2316 -

tuṅ, n. pl. ntuṅ (ta-ma) ear; bo nn ntùṅ mab they shut their ears;

tuṅ, v.

tuṅgùṅ, n.

tuṅku̯ndàòṅ,

tuṅti, v.

tuṅti, v.

ntùṅ mi toṅ his ears tingle (when bad news is told);
§ lo’ntuṅ, to’ntuṅ, tuṅtu

dig, bury, inter; tuṅ koòd dig a latrine; tuṅ màndzi
dig a road; tuṅ mùn bury a person; turì ni ndab
drive in posts for the construction of a house; § taxi,
ntàùṅtuṅ

loaf of a stiff maize-pap, loaf of bread; first loaf of
stiff maize-pap (the woman keeps it herself, if given
to her husband, he would become bad-tempered).

n. a bunch (head) of plantain

join together, string together (beads);

tuṅti lad (ndab) put raffia ribs side by side (to form
the inner wall of a house); bo ni nturṅti mfa wom ni ta’
ṅkṳ̍ ńin, ǎ nti’ ntǎmfa they use to thread 1 beads on
one string, so that they had strings of pearls; § tus

intensive form of tcuṅ dig

tùṅtu, n. pl. ntuṅ ear-lobe; Bà’nií me’ ni nto’ ntùṅ mab, nnyṅ

tuṅu, n.

tusi, n.

tuta’tì, n.

tutu, n.

tutù, adv.

wobti all Bali women pierce their ers and attach rings;
§ tun

new moon; lunar madness, somnambulism;

mg to to ni tuṅu, bà bini fà’ le; n’dn ṅgâ, a la’ bi tsě
ni tso̤̍ṅni ṅu, bà me’ti it.: I shall come when the moon
starts to grow and we shall start the work; we know
that when the moon will wane, we shall finish;

§ ḋgaṅ-dzaṅ-tuṅu, tu

burying place, tomb, mound; tusi i ka b’ madzo’ bo
ntsě nta̤m ndi his tomb remains with us to this day.

crossway, crossroad; mà no’̤ m’ fù mà tuta’ti cover
the crossroad with magic medicine; § tca’t junction, tu

kind of bird with a rather long tail

each one for himself, everyone, each; § tu
mouse sp.

(ta-ma) stomach (of man or animal)

globular object, unformed lump of clay; tu ’tsa’ kneaded

- 61 -
clay; tu’tsi clot of salt (usually tied in banamna leaves).

tu’, v. sprout; bo kà bi mbiyaṅ, à tu’ they put peanuts into
the earth; they sprouted.

tus; draw, scoop (water, etc.) ;
wo̤̯ ni tu’ ntsi, wo̤̤̯ ni draw water without filling
the vessel completely; bo la’ tǐ ntu’ ṅkab they will
gain money; § ntu’

tû’bo, n. pl. ntû’mbo (a-ma) upper arm
tu’kù, n. pl. ntu’ṅkù (a-ma) calf (of leg)

tu’làm, n. parasitic plant sp., growing on trees, from the fruit of
which birdlime is extracted

tu’laṅ, n. pl. wooden block (the top end is round, the bottom
flat; used to sit on);
à bo̤ ni nù iba: m̠’ tu’laṅ bo̤ mà tso̤ti nàm, nnaṅ, m̌’
tu’laṅ bo mbò bṅkuṳ̯ mà tsi nindùn i there are two
kinds of blocks: one is used to cut meat on, the other
is for the children to sit on.

tu’m̯, v. bring out of, take down, bring down, move

tu’ni, adj. globular, spherical; fù tu’ni medicine tablet ;
fà’ tu’ni = fà’ nt̤̀mtà̤̯m work not yet allotted, still in
the hands of the chief or husband who will assign it
to the women, etc.; § mbuyṅnika̤d

tu’nto, n. bowels; § ko̤b

tu’ṅkwà̤n, n. back mausscles; tu ’ṅkwo̤̤̍n i tuum the muscles on his
back appear.

tu’ńàm, n. piece of meat (of one or more lbs)

tuti, v. encourage, awake, rouse, instigate, incite, press, impel;
bo tut’ti i ṅgâ, i kom sa’ they pressed him to take
the case up again.

sprout; ṅgwàfṳd tu’ti ma ṅgwa̤n kwà’ y;, mùn
bǒ̤ nazg. i tsàṅti a malize is sprouting well in the

field, he who regards it, enjoys it.

tu’tsa’, n. lumop of kneaded clay

tu’tsi, n. clot of salt

 

 

 

tu’tu’, adj.

tu’, v.

d n

v:

tùn, n.

tn, n.

tṳ̌n, v.

t̯nbàṅ, n.

tṳ̯ndab, n.

t̯ndù’, n.

n.

=

clotted, balled ;
ṅ’kà bf k’ ma (̇g wa̤n, à swi bo̤ tu’tu’ I have planted
colocasia on the farm, it grow’s downwards like a ball.

make s.o. proudVf arrogant; strengthen selfconciousness
by flattery ; ṅ’kà tu’̯ ni mbi’ yǐ fa’, i ni mfà’ a i̇gâ, i la
ku̯su̯ mà fǎ’ kwà’ mbòṅkad flattered him about his
work that he might continue to do good work.

tree, stick, timber, wood, post;

bo dz tṳ mà kud ṅkà’ they used sticks from a tree to
make a fence; ty fkaṅ tree used for making walking
sticks, etc.; tf’ṳ̯ mbàṅnibàṅni cross, obliquely placed post
in a wall, brace (usually placed crosswise) ;

t mbodka̯d . soft wood, not termite-proof;
timber, post; tgṳ̯ ndzù’ tree, used to prepare medicine;
tṳ̯-ndù’ vine; ty ntââ’to’ forked post to support the eaves;
t̯ ntsà’ thorny tree, its juice is cooked and thus used to
harden earthenware; silkworms like to feed on that tree;
ntuṅtuṅ tree used to support and fix the housewalls,
it is driven into the ground; ty cotton tree;

tṳ sisi ebony wood; tu tamko̤̍ko̤’ tree its fruits are
used instead of soap; ty tikwa’ thorny shrub which pro-
duces globular shaped fruits of about two in. in diameter.

pay compensation, repay; ù san yo kan, le, u to tṳ̯ you
broke the dish, you will pay for it.

tie (round): i tg̤̍m tù i be ties s.th. around his head to
guard against a headache or as ornament.

strength; vu tg̤̍m death by force, accident; §

iron, metal; t’ṳ̯n dzǎd the iron is to be forged
redhot; § t’̯nbàṅ, tṳ̯n ṅgùmba, ńama, tn sisi

be or become strong, stubborn, high in price, fierce in
quarrel: la, ù ni ṅkuṳ̯ bo̤ tu, t’ ma b̯âd nt̤̤̀ u bo
you but only stiffen your neck and are not willing to
repent:; § to̤nka̤d

copper; § tn

timber, post, timber useful for construction

vine

tree sp., the bark of which is used as medicine

a ;

t̀nka̤d, adj. strong, heavy, difficult; t̤̍nkaād li heavy sleep;
t̤̍nka̤d nù difficult matter, affair; § nto̤ûnkad, to̤n, to̤n

t̍nmfòn, n. power of the chief; d tṳ̍n bo̤ tf̤̍nmfòn you are pow-
erful only through the chief.

t̀nmu’, n. branding iron (to brand slaves)
t̀mndùṅ, adj. expensive, costly

t̀ni, v. fix a high price; b̤̍wi ni nďṅ kědzṳ̯ ma ntan the
women raise the price in the market.

tṳn fufu, n. silver, white metal; §

tṳn ṅgùmba, n. the double bells of the Ngumba (secret society which
governs the tribe); the bells are also called mṳ̍koṅko̤ṅ;
tṳ̯n ṅgùmba lǎb ma nda ṅgùmba ma nťd mfòn; y àṅ-ṅgùmba
ni ṅkiti ṅgoṅ ṅgâ, ṅgoṅ tsi mboòṅka̤d; bo ni nno ndù’ ṅgàb-ṅgàb
the bells of the Ngumba remain in the house of the Ngumba;
the Ngumba-men guard the town so that they can live in
peace; M̤̍ko̤ṅko̤ṅ tsi madzi ṅgoòṅ ma ndà mbomti; bo ni mbu’,
ni ńńṳṅ ban, ni ntsàṅti, ni nno ndù’ M̀k. bells are kept in
the town in the society’s house; they beat the bells and
dance, rejoice and drink wine; § tegn

tṳnńama, n. copper, ore, brass, bronze; § ctyṳn

tṳnsi, n. iron ore; § tpgmn

tṳnti tu, v. shave the rim or edge of the hair; n’ t’ mà tu a
ṅgâ, mi’ ma lan I want to have a haircut so that my
face will look fine.

tṳntâ’to’, n. forked post to support the eaves; § mfaà’

tṳ̯ntsà’, n. (thorny) tree sp.; à bo tu ni ndzoṅ ni mbom i;
it is a tree which has thorns on its trunk.

tṳ̌ṅ, v. lull to sleep, fall asleep; i yab sleep overtook
them; n’ď’ nt̤ṅ li I fell asleep; i toṅ li he falls asleep.

tṳ̌ṅ, v. hang oneself; udas kà y ̌ _jude went and hanged
himself; § kwed, kweti

tuṅkù, n. kapok tree

tṳ̀ṅni. v. be or become zealous, rival, adhere to, cling to, persist ,
attend to .... unceasingly, be decided on doing s.th., be

 

 

tṳ sisi, n.

n.

= 6 =

N

resolute; o to̤̍ṅni ni ṅki’ le ti, ko̤ la you are clinging to

that basket, have it; ma nd mṳ̯̍ bo̤ do not trouble
me so unceasingly; i kà to̤ṅni nd i titi ṅgâ, i fa yum mbò i
he troubled him so much so that he might give him some-
thing; oo̤ to̤ṅni ni fà’ le l’ ni mbuṅntsu’, mmè’ti since

early morning we persisted in doing the work and finished it.
i wě nùù, ntṳ̤̍ṅni mg̤̍ he got a firm hold over the affair and
would not leave it unsettled.

ebony wood

also: tu̯ feorked, indented post

tṳ̯-tubù’ndab, n. corner post for house construction

t̯tuwàn, n.

tuutù̯, adv.

ensign, standard bearer; tgṳtuwaàn ni ntsa̯m kǒṅfù ni
ndib Lela the standard bearer bears the medicine spear’
at the time of the Lela festival. The spear is prepared
with the blood from a fovwl.

from tree to tree, high up, in the air

tu̯’, p. coref. 1. pl. excl. we. on our part

t̯’, p.poss.

nun

ty’ti, v.

twed, v.

twiti, v.

fap ṅ̍ou

surrender, hand over, put in order, encourage, admonish;
tṳ̯’ nda ù, mbi’ ù to ku a put your house in order,
because you are going to die; § nt’’ commandmend,
last will, testament

be or become silent; bo mè dzib they became
speechless; à ť̤’ mè poṅ itis stockstill.

encourage one another, edify, admonish one another;
bà ni ntg’ni bò ni bò mà Iǎ ku̯su̯ ni yò fà’ nt̤̍nka̤d
we encourage ourselves to continue with the hard work.

admonish, encourage; whisper
crackle, burst, explode ;
bo ni ṅkaṅ ṅg wàfṳd. ǎ ntwed ti when they roast

corn, it crackles.

spit, expectorate:; i ni ntwiti nti heis spitting a lot;
twiti’ spitl

