Ts

tsa, n.

tsǎ, v.

tsǎ, v.

tsab, adv.

==3;6;ss =

point, tip, top, summit; fingertip.

boil, bubble; à c;’ miyà, à tsǐ it will boil in a short
while; à tsǐ muṳ̯ it has boiled; naṅ ntsi, à tsǐ boil
water.

pass (strength, power, knowledge, etc.), overcome,
congquer, need, want; no tsǎ ṅgâ must, be compelled;

à tsǎ a tsǎ it is too difficult for me; i cg̤n ntsà a

he is stronger than I; i ts ṅgoòdṅ bùn me’ ni tn = i t̤n
ntsǎ ṅgòṅ bùn me’ be is stronger than all;;

i ť̤n ntsǎ mfamni he is extremely strong; moǎ’ nù̀ kà
ntyab something passed them, they were in want

of s.th.; noù̀ tsǐ bo ṅgâ. bà nuyṅ ntṳ̯ bo nn nù be, bà kǐ
ndzu’ a. kwà’ ni to̤̍n ṅgâ, nù be ma nd b, bà sam bo̤
we must put all our energy into what we have heard so
that these things do not pass us by and we miss them;
ale nàù kà tsa i ga, i ti’ ṅgo̤ṅṅgoṅ ndzo̤ fd bi ni
màndzi nù me’ he had to be like his brothers in every
respect; noù tsǐ yò mùn le sě i̇gâ, yum bo̤ mbò i, yi, bofà
i kà̤ i mǎ̯ this man must have s.th. to offer God;
nù ti tsǎ i ṅgâ, mǒ’ màùn toti ts̤̍ṅni mùn mb i boo̤ he
was not in need to be taught about human nature by s.o.;
nù ti ntsà vyab iṅgâ, lamput ṅka̤̯̍ yab, ńǐm nta yab bo̤
they need no lamp nor sun to shine upon them;

ba yin Inn mu ṅgâ, n bò kě ni ntsa yin your father
knows quite well that you need that; à tsa mbo it’s
beyond measure; m̀ṅg wi tsǎ mbo a woman beyond
measure; a strumpet, prostitute; ;

nù sǎ a mà to cannot come; mà to mà nd mà tsà
a bo itis not too hard for me to come; § tsàkad,
tsǎo̤n. ko̤’ni, ntsanù

smack the tongue; ts nfsù insult (regarded as provo-
cation, offend person), scoff, mock at, abuse, insult;
§ tsàbti, tsàbni, kamti, ntsàbni

soak, steep; bo tsàb ṅgwàfṳd ma ntsi, ndzi lo̤m,
nnanì, à ti’ ṅkaṅ they dip the maize into the water, then
they grind it and afterwards they cook it and it turns
into beer; bo tsàb ṅgwaàfṳ̯d ma ntsi they soak the Indian
corn in water (to make it germinate) ;

bo ln mà tsǎb ndzi mà ntsi, ndzitǐ nš’ they drench

the clothes in water and wash them.

full up; à lun mè tsab tit is full up.

 

 

-;

tsabli, v. feel feeble, be or become giddy;
mbùm à tsablitsàbli feel giddy.

tsàbni, v. scoff at, smack with the tongue; slander, defame; § tsǎb

tsǎbṅkùndòṅ, n. tissue from a half-rotten banana trunk, it is
sponge-like and is used as tightening material for
palmwine-tapping

tsàbti, v. scoff at, mock at, slander;
i kà to, ntsàbti a ṅgâ, m’ bo̤ yan, la, i fǎbsuṅ, he came
and mocked me, saying that I was a thief, but he was
lying; § ntsàbni, tsǎb

tsàbùfòn, n. also: tsàbù̯ the highest, surpassing all other chiefs
(the manner of greeting a chief)

tsad, n. game

tsad, v. spit through the interstices between the filed front-
teeth; § nti

tsad, adv. entirely, very much, very quick; à un mà tsad tt is
quite full (of liquid); i wd mu’ mè tsad be strikes
fire (with matches) at a stroke; i kà mè tsad it took
him a moment to draw a straight line.

tsafid, interj. thati’s it’ (introducing a quotation one is agreeing
with); tsafid, Vohanne Tańambo’, y, i kà suṅ ṅgâ, i to fǐ
mèà ni mè a; a ndzo̤ à bo a it was an apt word from
john T. who said so and so ...; that s it.

tsàka̯d, adj. difficult, hard, heavy (affair); mo̤ ni ṅgo̤ oo nd tsàka d
nù T am going but only because of a sudden and
difficult event; § ts

tsǎkù̯n, adj. forced, compelled, constrained; mo ni ṅgo̤ ma f(̇gwa̤n
ni tsǎko̤̍n na I am going to the farm but under force;
§ tsǐ

tsàlà ’, n. kind of bag, made in the neighbourhood of Tsang;
bo tam tcsàlà’ they make a ba;g (of that kind).

tsam, v. forgive, pity, have mercy, mourn, complain, grieve, pain;
ù tsam ko e? = ù soòdbni ko̤ e?’ why are you wailing?
nt i ni ntsam nù his heart is grieving abouth s.th.;
i tsam v mfa̯d i he is bewailing the death of his brother;
tsam ṅgo̤’ bewail affliction; bo ni ntsaṅti mbi’ ntsamka̯̤d

ames. mb’ i ni ntsam bàùn titi they are happy because

=s33 o: --

of merciful jacob, because he has pity with people.
tsamka̤d, v. care for, provide for, supply
tsamni, v. show pity for one another
tsàmu̯, n. foolishness, ignorance

tsàmu̯, v. be or behave foolish; ù tsàmuy ti you are foolish;
bi tsàmu ti, nto̤ yin l̤̯d s mà bim you are very
stupid; your hearts are slow to believe.

tsàmu̯ka’ṅgàṅ, n. kind of azalea, grows easily, used for fences
tsàni, v. be or become too difficult; § es, k’ni, nsànika̯d

tsàṅ (ntsaṅ), v. aux. to express possibility (placed after the tense
marker and followed by the prenas. form of the verb) ;
sometimes, perhaps;
bo bati ṅgâ kè m̌ ṅ̍go̤̍n tsàṅ mbo̤ wu’ e?’ they asked,
if perhaps there was a stranger; à Io’ ntsàṅ mbǎṅ, mbo̤
à to Sama ṡkuṅ, Sama had better come first;
yò ndzi tsàṅ mbǎṅ this garment is good somehow,;
lâ, ù oǒ̤ ntsàṅ nd’h mà ts tù u, ù tsù’ but, if you
can possibly free yourself, do it.

tsǎṅ, v. be or become spoiled, spoil (of liquids); ndù’ le tsàṅ mo̤̍
the palmwine became bad; § pa’, tsàṅuṳ

tsaṅ, n. copper ring, bracelet; formerly used as money, then
used as the monthly dowry given to the kindred of the
women; bǎkuṳsuṳ̯ kà bo̤ mbuṳm, tsarṅ bati mandz̯̀m
first, cowries were used for money, then copper rings;
à kà bo̤ ni ndib 1d3o boà bìmǒ’ lùm, tsaṅ iba bo̤ mà ty
catechist ni ta’ ṅu, à bo̤ ta’ sili; ba-Samuel Fe kà tso
fà’ ni 1o, ni ṅko̤ tsaṅ intu’ n; ta’ ṅu (sili ited)
it was in the nineteen thirties, when a catechist received
two copper rings = one shilling; Samuel Fe began as a
catechist in 121 and received six copper rings a month,
three shillings.

tsaṅ, n. prison, chain, fetter, shackle; bo yγ̇ tsaṅ ni; ṅ̍kù mi
they tied fetter around his feet; § ndâtsadn, ṅgàṅ-tsaṅ

tsàṅṳ̯, v. throw up and catch again with the hands;
i tsàṅṳ mâmbod le be throws the little child, playing

and catching it again.

tsàṅka̤d, v. spoil, be or become spoiled of many objects or subjects

 

 

n

tsaṅla, v. (used as interj.): come on, go on;
bi tsaṅla ndzàṳ̯ tàù i le = i tso’ k̍§n̤d ni tù i le
take away some of the blame pressing upon him;
tsaṅla, nsuṅ mbò i ṅgâ, i to, ṅgyèmti a go (on) and
tell her, she should come and help me.

tsàṅni, v. fix upon, be or get entangled; m’ bǒ̤ ntu’ ’mg̯̯g mǎlàm ni
mi’ ma, ni ṅkiti ṅwà’ni, mi’ ma ntsàṅni tsàṅni when
I take off my spectacles and am looking at my book,
my eyes get irritated.

tsǎṅṅgu’, v. triumph, show malignant joy, celebrate a victory
tsàṅti, v. enjoy, rejoice, be delighted; § muytsàṅti
tsaṅti, n. joy, pleasure, delight, gladness

tsaṅtsaṅ, n. spasm, numbness (of limbs); cramp, convulsion ;;
Esaṅtsaṅ wě kù i a cramp attacked his foot; n’ dzu’
m̌’ n’, tsaṅtsaṅ we a heard something that made
me speechless; tsaṅtsaṅ ṅuṳti i a spasm caught him.

tsaṅtsaṅ, adj. stiff, convulsive, cramped

tsàṅ̯, v. scoop (with a ladle) and slowly pour back into vessel
to cool or examine carefully; yum exahibit s.th.
which ought to be hidden; tsàṅṳ̯ mâ’bod throw into
the air small child and catch again; § esṅ

tsǎṅ vu, v. go around with the things of person just having died;
bo ni ntsaṅ vù i ni kě6ě bi they bewail his death by going
around with his goods.

tsarararad, onom. thoroughly, completely; a san màè tsarararad
it splits to pieces completely; à tsini mè tsarararad
it’s as straight as an arrow.

tšěb, v. soak, dive, dip, plunge; rub in;
i mà ntě6d ntsǎ̤b ntsàù i ndiò bo̤ be has not eaten any-
thing as yet today,; ts̤b tù u rub your head in;
i tš̤b ṅgwàfṳd ma ntsi he soaks the Indian corn in
water (to make it germinate); mǒ’ soge kà tsâb swâm
madz ndù’ one of the soldiers soaked a sponge in vine;
§ esǎb

tsa̯m, v. take a load on the head, carry load on the head;
tsa̯m ntsuṅtsuṅ carry (esp. fowls) head downwards;
mbùm behave boastfully.

tsa̤mntuṅ

tsà̤mti, v.

tsa̤mti, v.

tsan:

tsav.

tsǎ’, v.

tsa’bo, n.

tsa’bo, n.

tsa’ bo, v.

tsa’du, n.

=: 32 =

honorary name for young men (used by the old men)

whisper, murmur secretly, speak gently ;

to, bà tsà̤̯mti, bǎ to y̤̌ ma ṅg wa̤n ni mbǎ’mbà’ mà fǎ’
fà’, ṅǩ’ ndù’ s come and let us talk with a low
voice; let us go to the farm in the morning and work
and also tap palmwine; § nctavṅntsa̤m

carry s.th. on the head

clay, earthenware, pottery, brick, tile ;
mbaṅtsa’ vessel made of earth, pot made of clay;
tfsa’ bunrnt brick or tile.

condemn, despise, disregard, undervalue;

i mà (̇koṅ a bg, i ni ntsa’ a, ni ndo’ à ndzo̤̍̌ yum mom-
mom be coe:s not like me, he disregards me and
considers me as s-.th. useless.

shake, look after, examine;

màùn bǒ̤ ṅkò’ ma ṅgwa̤n, mvi sàṅ, i γo̤, ntsǐ’

if somebody sets a trap on the farm, at dawn he will
go and look; bo lh mà ts’ mango kè pear kè dzoòm (̇gí§
ntàm mi vɑ̌ masi e?’ can they shake mango-, pear- or
plum- trees, so that their fruits fall down? § tsaà ti

pl. ntsa’mbo (a-ma) palm of hand ; § csa’kù

a bunch (of plantain) with one, two or three hands;
clusters

clasp the hands around one’s own neck (sign of mourning),
also: keep only one hand on the neck (if the father has
died the right hand, in the case of the mother’s death the
left hand).

swarm of bees, settled in clusters

tsà’ka̤d, adj. dirty; tsà’ka̯d ndzi dirty cloth; § mà̤nka̤d ndzi

tsa’kù, n. pl. ntsa’ṅkù (a-ma) foot between toes and ankle; § csa’bo

tsa’mbùm, n. figure, form, shape (of my body)

tsà’ mu, v.

give pain, torture, grieve, torment, trouble ;

nsòṅ mi tsà’ mṳ̯ his teeth ache; bo tsà’mṳ̯ na mè

they torment me terribly; mdzo̤̍m tsà’mg̯ mi he dreamed;
§ varṅṳ

 

 

 

- :

tsà’ni, v. salute one another

tsa’nibo, n. pl. tsa’nimbo wrist (of hand)

tsa’ntamndù’, n. bunch of grapes

tsa’ntontɑǎn, n. burnt brick or tile

tsa’ṅgṳ̀ṅ, n. ear (of corn)

ts’ǎ’ ṅkò’, v. look after the trap

tsà’ti, v. salute, greet, thank, pray; tsà’ti pray to God.

tsa’ti, n. greeting, salutation; § ts

tšd, v. be clumsy’awkward in movement or shape or talking or
dancing, be ungainly; § ntsa̤d

tsad, v. also: tsed embank, dam up

tsad, v. be or become very much” abundant, overflowing;
à tsa̤d a tsa̯d with me it is in abundance; ndab tsad,
laṅndzù’ tsa̤ d ni teohere is a lot of dirt in the house
and in the yard; mon o tsa̤d tsu ti this man keeps on
talking foolishly; ṅkab tsa̤ d mbò mfàn teone chief has a
lot of money; tàù a tsad t, mo̤ ni nt’ mà kom; ńùṅ tsa̤d
ni tù a ti ny head has too much hair; I want to have
a haircut; there is too much hair on my head; § kab

tšn, v. also: tsǎn pousrh, strike against, upset, overthrow;
alkalize water

tšn, v. be or become carried away, entangled ;
bo tsà̯̀n s kwaà’ Ben ni f̤̍ni-mi’ madb (e, i tàd, ntso sǎ
ti’ m̤̌ they even pushed Ben in pretending s.th., he
jumped and even went into it.

ts̤ntsì. n. lye. water alkalized by filtering with vegetable ashes;
(formerly used instead of salt); § tsěntsi, tsindzi

tsati, v. rise above, cover, be in the way of;
ma ntsati a ni; ńùm bo̤ co not stand in my way;
mbad le tsa̤ti mǎ’ mbad tuis hill rises above another
hill; § tsebi

tsè, n. trap to catch white rats with;
i γǎṅ tsè. ṅgǒ̤ mbiṅti mbàb m̤̌, he prepares a trap
to go and catch white rats with.

=3 n.:

tse, v. put over the fire (in order to cook)
tsě, v. reach, arrive; i to boṅṳ mà ts he vill arrive soon.

tsěǎ, prp. till, until; tǐ ṅgo̤ ma ṅwà ni; ts ni ndib mas we
will be going to school until christmas; b’mo’ bùn sisi
ka ni ṅkwa̤d bùn ntfsě nta̤m ntsù ndiò up to this day
some africans still practise cannibalism; i kà y yò nàù,
à tsě ṅka ited be has done this three or for the third
time; màòrn, yi, i tsě itàn a tone fifth person; à csě ibí
twice, second.

tsed, v. also: tsa̤d dam up, embank; bo csed ntsi mà w nsu
they dam up the rivulet, in order to catch fish.

tsèkù, n. mouse with striped fur; § mbàb

tsemti, v. make possible, bring up, enable, qualify; ndib, ṅ’kà ka
mùṅkṳ̯ a, mǎ’ mùn kà tsemti a ṅgâ, n’ti’ mùn when I was
still a boy, somebody brought me up to become a man.

tsěn, v. filter, drain

tsen, n. (ta-ma) forehead; tseèn ti lan mbo bùn be finds favour
with the people; i kud tsen be frowns (his brows; to
express displeasure); § dzen ntsù’ndab

tsǎěnmu’, n. also: tsěmu’ fireside, hearth, altar

tsěǎnmu’kṳti iìikòb altar (to make burnt offerings to God)

tsǎnmu’těǎn libano altar of incense

tsěnṅgamnsi, n. spider’s poison (mygale elondii), very painful;
tsěnṅgamnsi kà ńǎ’ mvou̯ à, nt’ mà num a s the spider
killed my dog and wanted to suck my skin too; § (ṡìgam

tsěǎnńàm, n. bile, gall (of animal)

tsěǎnńo, n. snake’s poison; also: snakes’s double tongue; § ńo
tsènti, v. urinate; § ntsen

tsěntsi, n. salty water from ashes; à kà bo̤ ndib kuṳ̯sṳ̯, bo kà I’
bumu’ boà ntsi, ńńàmti, ntsěèn, à ti’ tsěntsi, bo navṅ tsěǎn-
tsi, ntsi dzum, à ti’ tsilum formerly ashes were mixed
with water and then filtered; it turned into saltwater;
this was then cooked and dried and thus became salt;

§ esa̤̍ntsi, tsilum

 

 

tseti, v.

tsè’ni, n.

tsè’ni, v.

tsi, n.

tsi, n.

tsi, n.

tsi, v.

tsi, v.

= 6 ’§ -

also: tsedti keep off (person from); § tsati

hunt, set on (men to work, dog for hunting);
yǎṅ-v̯̤m ni ntse’ mv (ṅgâ, i tso’ k ńàm, ṅgǒ̤, ṅg wě
the hunters set the dog to track the game, to ruh
and catch it; tu-fà’ ni ntse’ γǎṅ-fà’ ṅgâ, bo fa’ ni to̤̍n
the headman sets the workers to work with energy.

horizontal sections of the wallframe; tseè’ni ndab
cross-beam.

conduct, lead, accompany, escort, attend, bring to;

bo tsè’ni ṅgònndam tteoaey bring the bride to the bride-
groom; bo tse’ni vin they bring grass for the roof;

bo ni ntsè’ni vin they fetch grass for thatching
the roof; mà’ti, n’ tse’ni u ma màndzi wait a moment,
I shall accompany you on the way, I shall see you off.

affinity, caused by marriage; § nctsi
father in law; § nctsi
salt; tsi le ńim telae salt is dissolving.

rest, stand, sit, remain (with); tsi ̇ko̤ remain un-
married; tsi saṅ stay awake; csi be alive, be in
good health; tsi mommo;m idle, be unemployed;

i tsi ni mi’ mi hae stood before him; i ntsi boà bàńàm
he was with the animals:; bo tsi và’li-va’l’i they are on
bad terms; i tsi ntsuṅtsuṅ, he sits or stands with his
head bent down; i tsi ńaṅ̤-ńaṅṳ̯ he is on the verge of
starting; i tsi mè = i tsi màè íi̤’ hae sits there
insensibly; ù tsi mè ni ṅka ko̤ e?’ for what reason are
you sitting here in such a mood?’ g dzi’ni, ntsintàd

hit, hurt, break to pieces, bruise, crush, curse; forge, cast,
gild; i tsi wo masi he curses (by banging on the ground
with a stone, in order to make the ancestors listen to
what he has to say); nini Sama kà ntsi wo i (̇̇gâ, i ku
Sam’s brother knocked Sam’s stone which caused Sam to
die; Nini talks by means of his own power;

lâ, bìmo’ ni ntsu mb bàkunsi ṅgâ, bo ńs’’ mùn le but
some people turn to the ancestors and ask them to kill
that person; tsi làm feorge; tsi poíâṅ kè franc coin, mint,
stamp money: tsi yum ni; tn bàṅ feorge or cast a thing
in copper: kaṅ. bo kà tsi ni galld a gilded vessel;

§ kalàm. làm

tsib, adv. quite; à mè tsib it is stockstill; § dzib

tsifu̍nì, n. false friendship; mfa̤d à Nko’ntan tsi boui bo̤ ni f̤ni,
le bo ṅgâ, i mà ntsi’ nt̤̀ i nď ma̯̍ bo ny, sister N. and
I have a false friendship, i.e. she does not trust me.

tsilum, n. salt made from ashes; § esěntsi

tsimà’, interj. said to a sneezing child; good healthi
tsimbombom, n. salt tied into leaves and fixed in this shape
tsindzi, n. soap lye; § cts̤ntsi

tsini, v. be or become straight, just, to a standstill, correct
tsini lùm ited teone rain stopped for three years;
l̤̀m tu tsini mṳ̍ you are speaking correctly;
à tsini mè tsàràràràd itis as straight as a bolt ;
tsini ku̯tṳ̯ stand upl j csini vu = i; tsi ma ľ̤’ vu mà
kiti ṅgâ, mě̠̌’ nù ma mbùli bo̤ be stands among the
mourners and watches that nothing goes wrong;
i tsini mṳ̯̍ she is with child (said during the first
three months of pregnancy); § ntsinika̤d

tsint̯̀d, n. pl. of ntsint̯̯̀d servant and guardian at the palace

tsiṅgwaṅ, n. salt; à tum ma ntsa’ ma m l̤’ ma Ndoòb kè ma Mamfe;
a ni ntum ndzo̤̍ ntsi; bo b̤̌ nnaṅ ntsi le, à kud, nti’ tsi
it comes out of the soil at a certain place in Ndop or
in Mamfe; it wells out like water; if this water is boiled,
it clots and turns into salt.

tsiti, v. beat, bruise, make brittle; siti kù beat or knock with
foot; bo tsiti ya’ tṳ̀, à sèt they beat the bark, so that
it becomes tender-.

tsitsàbmbuṳ̀ṅ, n. also: tsitsàntsì puddle, slough

tsitsa’mbàṅ, n. waste matter of oilpalm fruits after squeezing the
boiled fruits

tsitsa’mbṳ̀ṅ, n. children’s game, played near the water; they take
water in the palm of their hands and throw it up as
high as possible.

tsitsid màùn, n. pl. tsitsid bùn silent, taciturn person;
tsitsid mùn bo̤ màùn, yi, i mà ni ṅko’ mu̯̍ mà tsu bo̤ a
a taciturn person is a person who does not like to
respond: § ntsi tsitsid

 

 

-; -

tsitsid, n. plant sp. with lily-coloured blossoms, used as a vegetable
tsìtsṳ̍ṅ, n. also: tsùtsuṳ̀ṅ shadow, shade, darkness
tsìtswè, n. hairy caterpillar sp., inedible; tsitswe bàṅbàṅ red caterpillar

tsi v: put, lay, place, set, install, appoint, store, keep, preserve,
fix, trust in, be or become settled;
tsi’ lampùd mandàùn tebi put the lamp on the table;
i tsi’ mbaṅ hae crushes palmkernels; tsi’ mbùm control
onesellf; i tsi’ naṅ ù ba has laid an ambush for you;
bo tsi’ ntsà̤̯m ndǐ̌ ù tohey made a plot against you;
mban e tsi’ ntsù i the abcess has a head, it will open;
tsi’ nť̤̤ u nd esu teust in jesus, put’ your heart
on .; i kà tsi’ bàkwàn kwaàtad be had seven slaves;
bi to. ndzṳ̯ nɑ̤mfòn. y, Ba mṳ̍ kà nebti, ntsi’ mboò bin lò’
ni ndib, i kà bǐ̌d mà nèbti mvi a comes, inherit the king-
dom which my father has prepared for you from the
foundation of this world; i kà tsi’ yg’ ni yǎ̇-ntùm bi
he appointed us as his messengers; i tsi’ tǎṅ i ni yum-
dzṳ̯, ku̍ ln mà dzṳ bo̤ be is gluttonous for food, but
cannot eat; i tsi’ a (̇gâ, ṅ’ go ma nctan (ì̇kàṅka he
appointed me to always go to the market; § adzab

tsǐ’, v. be or become blunt, stupefied, hardened, stubborn;
bear, forbear, sustain; muń tsňf mu̯ the knife is blunt;
§ kubli; ntṳ̯ biìmo’ bùn ts’ the heart of some people
hardened; mon e tsi’ ti this child is very insusceptible;
i tsɑ ntṳ̯m ti he is very brave; ntuṳ̯ Farao kà ts’ ni nù
mbuṳ̯ka̯d tone heart of Pharao became hardened by mis-
doing; i ts’ ntuṅ ti be coes not like to hear or obey;
ù ma ni ntsi’ γǎṅ-yǎ-nù-mbuṳ̯ka̯d bo̤ you cannot bear
evildoers; § ntuṅ, dzi’ni

tsì ni, v. sneeze; i tsi ni moga̯̍ he sneezed (statement made with
great joy, when a new-born child sneezes and thereby

gets rid of whatever is still in its nose).

tsǐ’ni, v. fix (a date, a plan), agree, plan; i ts ni mṳ̌̍ he has
matured; i ts’ni mbùm ; be controls himself.

tsǐ ntṳm, n. bravery, intrepidity, obstinacy, frankness, sincerity
tsi’ti, v. put on (cthing) , lay on, set on
tsi’tsa’mbàṅ, n. residuum of palmoil

tso, v. enter, entangle with, start (to do), break out, be deep;
bd tso war started; nctsi le tso ti the water is very

tsoli, v.

=s S’

deep; tso baṅ go on board; tso dzǎdd start to shout ;
tso nda yàb settle a dispute: bu’ mfa̤d à kǎ mfa ni

ku̯s̯, à bi bo̤ manadzà̤m bu’ i mè’ti fa’ni le, ntso nda y’
first I had a quarrel with my brother, later we ended

the quarrel and entered our houses’’, we settled the
quarrel; tso nsu̯’ enter into cooperation; tso ṡkwali

start to heap up soil round plants (maize) ; i tso ṅkoòd sě
he also interfered in the quarrel; i tso k( ṅkad bo m̌’
mùn be joined another man, he agreed with him;

tso mu̍ṅg wi = mà tsa̯m nd. ṅgǒ̤ mfa mbò ba mǒǎ̌’ m-
mu̍ṅg wi, i no, nti’ mbim mbòo ? mon ji to lam u
wooing a woman is done like this: one carries palmwine
and goes and presents it to the father of the girl; he
drinks from it and then agrees that you may marry his
daughter; tfso sum make friends with; tso suṳ fà’

start new work; cso tsaṅ go to prison; à kà cso y’

it overcame us, we underwent; i kà tso mùy uda he
became a jew; i tso ma ndab he went into the house;

i tso mà tso’ kǐ bùn be bea started to persecute these
people; i so mat so§̤̍ṅni mfàn hae submits himself

to the chief; à tso nd i mè tsàd it hurts it (the animal)
deadly; bo tso bon ni bad they make war on the people;
bo tso màùn ni b̤̍ kè ṅgwa̤d tohey rub a person with
camvood or oil; ṅgoṅ so ni bò u, o ti ko̤̤̍ ṅkumti Ni̇kòb e?
you became mayor of the town and now you forget God
(who gave it to you); bo tso ni ndùṅ yab they joined them;
ntsin tso ni ndzi the garment became wet; ndon tso ni tàù i
a curse will come over him; ńùm tso ma mbàd the sun
sets; § ntsoka̤d, ntsonù

blame, shout at s.o., mock, deride; bo kà tsoli yan le
they mocked the thief.

unite, be or become united; insist on
slander, scoff; n’ tsob u yàyù shame on you, fie on youl
be or become spotty

big, black spotted wild cat; § kaà’wun

permit, allow, test (to eat from the new crop or test. ;
s.o. with s.th. new to please the person); eat a certain
medicine which enables you to eat from the new crop
without getting a stomach ache; ko wàfṳ̯d mfo kè
mbiyàṅ mfo kè ku’, n’ tsobti u get fresh maize or
groundnuts or cocoyam, I will let you test, you will
like it; § dziti

 

 

tsod, n.

tsoṅ, v.

tsoṅni, v.

tso̤ṅu̯, v.

tso̤ṅṳ, adj.

tsò’, n.

g; =

big hat with feathers, used when dancing; some feathers
of the kudkoṅ belong to the ornamentation of it (the
price of such a hat with ten feathers of the kudkoṅ was
formerly one slave).

(indecent) whore; tsovṅ muṅgwi (obscene word for)
copulate with a woman

chase a wife to sleep with her

carry in the hand; tcsorṅ’ṳ̯ lampud carry a lamp with the
hand; § esu’

foolish, silly; tso̤ṅṳ̯ mùn foolish man

african lily; red, on the root stock growing fruit of the
cardamom (its white flesh has a sour taste); § nadzatsò’

ulcus tropicus, tropical ulcer
bird of prey, pigeon hawk; § mbbtso’

take out, draw out, tear off, extract, move, loan, borrow,
lose, fall out, reward, follow after, become a follower of,
persecute; leave, withdraw from, become sore, open, choose
select, give way; soṅ so’ mǔ̯̤ a tooth fell out;

Gwe kà Iàb i ni ṅgwaàn, ṅkwà̤n i tso’ Gwe flogged his
slave, so (hard) that his back became sore; ṅu fso’myṳ̍

the moon has appeared (said when the moon tcises late) ;
tso’ bùn choose people; tfso’ kàn withdraw from (faith-
less) treaty or agreement; tso’ kǐ ńàm track an animal;

’

tso’ kù màùn (teollow or trace a person; tfso’ koǐ mùn ni yum
follow a person, in order to reward him in some way or
other; ma ntso’ kù u yγâ’ bo co not yield (or move your
foot from this very place); i so’ esu = i ko̤ k
y’. be follows the steps of jesus; tfso’ mb̌bṅǩ ńàm

= tso’ ǩ ńàm; tso’ mfam extract a nail; so’ muyńi draw
the sword or knife; tso’ nmdo run quickly; tso’ ndzoṅ

ndɑǐ̌, mùn lend a hand to help, supply to the needs of s .o.;
tso’ ntsa’ steal the good soil (the γṅsà =

are said to walk up river in july and august, when the
rivers are filled with water and to steal good soil from
other farms and take it to their own farms to make them
fertile); so’ ntsùndab open a traditional way a door which
is shut; tcso’ ṅgod ṅka transplant young raffia plants;

tso’ ṅkab (oan or borrow money; tso’ soòṅ extract a
tooth; tso’ tso̤̍ṅ = tso’ ndibà’ vwhiff of a pipe;

tso’ ndânto̤ṅ, stand on hands, feet up.

tso’lìfod, n. landslide, thought to be caused by a snake-like animal,
called (lifod.

tsò’ni, v. throw away, cast away; tfsod’ni wo le ma (̇go̤̤ throw the
stone into the bush.

tso’ti, v. investigate, distinguish, put in order;
bn bṳ̍mbàṅ ni ntso’ti nù bò s e?’ do you Europeans also
distinguish between both hands (that certain things are
done with the right and others with the left hand) ?
bǎ- aounde boà bǎ-Moghamo maà ni ntso’ti bab n b̤wi bo̤
the aounde and the Moghamo make no difference between
their women, (they regard the wives of their fathers and
children the same as their own); tso’ti ṅgam consulting
the oracle, (to find out the cause of sickness or some
mischief, etc.); § ṅgamnsi

tso’ti kùb, v. also: tso̤’ti kùòb bet; each of the parties breaks off
a small piece of bark from the raffia stalk as his witness’;
i kà tsu tsu mbika̯d hae spoke the truth.

tso’titso’ti, adj. pitted with small-pox ;
ka̯̍̀màd tso’ti mi’ mùn ti small pox pits the face.

tsǒ, n. fool, buffoon, blockhead;;
u kwà’ tsǒ̤ (very insulting ) you really are a fooll

tso̤b, n. round stone, used to hew the big millstone; § tso̤bbṳ̤

tso̤b, v. hew (stone, wood) ; tso̤b ṅ̍kwin caut firewood;
bo kǎ ntso̤b ni ndib ni m6 wo (̇gâ, à tso’ mà lo̤m
ṅg wàfṳd in older times they sharpened a big stone with
a small one, so that it was rough enough to grind corn;
§ ntso̤btso̤b

tso̤b, v. sprout, blossom; mango tso̤b the mango teree flowers ;
§ fiti
tsǒ̤̍b, v. put up a sign of warning (in the field or at home se, ctc.);

tsě̌b yan peut up a sign of warning against thieves;

ṅ’ kà tsǒ̤b yan fà’a, ṅgâ, mùn ma ndzǒ̤ yum
wu’ bo̤; i bǒ̤ ndzǒ̤ě, ntso̤b le we , i v’ dzaṅ kè i ku

on my farm I have put up a magic sign against thieves
so that noone steals from there; but if s.o. steals, the
magic power will catch him and consequently he will
fall ill or will die; tsě̌o mùn ocblige a person by giving
them a magic drink, made of (fruit of a tree) at
special ceremonies; e.g. ba kà tsǒ̤b i ṅgâ, i ma

 

tso̤bbṳṳ̯̀, n.

tso̤bṅka, n.

tso̤bti ndù’,

tso̤bti, v.

== on -

nda’ nten bo, lâ, i bǒ̤ nten, ntsob le we i, i ku; ba m kà
nebti m’ fù, mfa mbòo i, i no ny father ’chained’ his
slave ’’magically’’, so that he would not run away; but if
he still runs away, the magic will hold him and he will
die. My father had prepared a magic drink and gave it to
him and he drant it;

tsǒb nù pour water on the feet of the person concerned
in dispute just settled to prevent a renewal of it;

e.g. ba yàb kà tsoě̌b mbò bo ṅgâ, bo ma nda’ mfa’ni bo,
mfa ndàù’, bo no. ṅǩ̤d ntsi ni ṅkù mab sě, lâ, bo b̤̌ nda’
mfa’ni, à wè yab, bo ku kè bo dzaṅ teoheir father applied
magic on them so that they would not quarrel again;

he gave them palmwine to drink and poured also water on
their feet , but should they quarrel again, the magic will
overpower them and they will die or fall ill;

tsoě̌b ntsa’ make a counter-charm against any evil influen-
ce working in the farm; i kà tsǒ̤b yab (ndz̤ bo kà ko̤ ntsi,
mbim l̤̍ṅ yab ni bùn kristo a) he marked them (as his
people, when they were baptized and confessed themselves
as Ghristians).

small stone which is used to grind camwood

also: tsobndù small hoe, used to smoothen the raffia
rootstock when palmwine is being tapped

v. tap palmwine; nd’ bǒ̤ nesi, mu̯ ntswe mboṅka̤ d
bo, ù l’ tsob, ṅgǒ̤ěû nesobti ndù’ le mǎ’ṅka, à bi’ni mà ts we;
tso̤b bo̤ m̌’ mí so (nṅko̤’ if the palmwine stays and does
not trickle properly anymore, you take a small spadelike
tool and clean the channel, so that the wine can start
to flow again; tsoob is a small, straight spadelike tool.

count (the single pieces of property, etc.), enumerate,
call up; bo tso̤bti lu̯ṅ kě = bo fuṅ kě be ńinńiìn they
call up the things one by one.

finish, bring to an end, stop, cut off, fix, arrange;

tso̤ě̌d m̤̍̌ the wind has stopped blowing;

mb̍ṅ tso̤ěûd mṳ̍ it stopped raining; tso̤ě̌d mg̯̤̍ the
rope is torn; tu ty tfso̤ě̌d mu̯̤̍ the top of the tree broke
off; tso̤ě̌d bà̤d = dzm ba̤d bring the war to an end;

bo tso̤ûd γ̤ě̌ ṅgònndam teohey burst out into the laughter
of the bride ’. a certain kind of laughing, when the bride
is conducted to the bridegroom; § pg;

tš̤ěd ndab cat up raffia ribs for house-construction;
tsǒ̤ûd ndǒ̤ set a limit; i tšd ntsoòd’ni he cuts his hair, so
that only a tuft of hair remains on the. back of the headè;
bo tso̤ěûd nù teohey arrange or resolve a matter;

tsodni,

tsǒdwo̤d, n.

tsṳ̍ku, n.

tsoli, v.

tsum, n.

tsùmntàò, n.

ts̀ni, v.

Eso̤ṅni, v.

tso̤ṅti, v.

tso̤ṅṳ v.

= 3; =

tso̤ěûd nù ṅgâ ... the congregation decided that ...;

i ts̤ě̌d lùm yab ba fixed the number of years;

tso̤ûd tso̤̍ṅni tu ndab trim the brim of the thatch-roof so
that it runs in a straight line; où tso̤ěûd tù a you have
outrun me, reached a place by using a shorter way and in
a shorter time; y no, mu̍ ni ndze a, mṳ̀ tǐ ṅkṳ̯ ndze bo
bub ṅgâ, m̤̌ ntsod ṅǩ bùn, bo ni nta’ ma lâ wu’
ṅgâ, n, bo ni ṅgyeti mbùm yàb a, tum ṅgo̤ṅṅgo̍ṅ ndzo̤
f’ a I am coing this to checkmate those who would
like to make out that the work of which they boast, they
work on the same terms as I do; tso̤ûd tu-vu finish the
funeral ceremonies; § ṡku’ mu̯mbaṅ

set a limit; § cso̤ni

also: tsǒdγwo̤d waist of the ṅkoṅf̯n (kind of wasp)
stunted; tg’ le vu tso̤dwo̤d the tree becomes stunted.

’

mouse sp. (found in the house)

cut off (the way, etc.); § eso̤d

gourd, pumpkin, leaves of pumpkin; § m

vegetable cooked from leaves of tso̤m

also: tsṳ̀dni put up a limit, split up into groups;
(ma ntso ma yǎ ndab bo̤, n’ ti tso ma y ndab sě bo
do not enter my house, I too do not enter youcrs) ;
tso̍ni nd̤̍ fà’ Sama mark the border of Sama’s farm.
also: tsuṳṅni stand, gape about, move about aimlessly,
see others working without lending a hand;

i tso̤ṅni tso̤ṅni mb ko̤ e?’ why is he looking sad ?

be or become full of fruits (tree or other plant)
dangle: i lampùìd (oa carries the lamp dangling

it from his hand; ńo le tsogṅṳ n; bò i the snake hangs
from his hand.

tstìi, n. also: ntso̤kti measure of liquids, esp. to measure oil

cut into pieces, cry out, proclaim, publicize;
tsotfi kòb bet; ndo̤ cut raffia stalks to a fixed
length.

be or become edged’sharp”sour”angryharsh”hot;
ńùm ti mu̍ ni ṅku̯ nta yab, ntso̤’ bo they will not suffer

 

;

any longer under the heat of the sun; bi tso̤’ mi’ min ni
kǎě be keep an eye on these goods; i ts’ he became
angry: § tso’ni, ṅgàṅ-tso̤’ni, ntso̤’, ntso̤’ka̤d, tso̤’ntṳm

tso̤’, n. vagina ,, sexual passage in female, from uterus to external
orifice

tso̤’, n. cloth, garment; § tso’tu

tsǒ̤’, v. spot, draw, sprinkle, spatter, speckle;

mfòn tsǒ̤’ γàǎṅ-gàb ni ṅgwa̤d chief sprinkles the
newly circumcised with oil; nesi ṅwà’ni tsǒ̤’ ni mǒ’ I̤’
ndzi ink spattered here and there on the garment:;

bo tso̤’ ntsi ṅwà’ni ma mbènndab they splashed the
wall of the house with ink.

v. be a keen hand in shooting (with arrow, gun or spear);
i Iǐh mà kwà’ mboṅka̤_d, nta̯m ńùm kù̯̍ fan bo̤ he can
aim very well and shoot an animal without missing it.

n. harshness, sharpness; ba mò̤ kà bo (̇gàṅ-tso̤’mi’, i kà
kiti nù kwà’ mbòṅka̯d ny father was very keen-eyed,
he watched things very well.

tso̤’§nì, v. intensive form of tso̤’ be or become easily excited
tso̤’ntṳm, n. ansger, irritation
tso̍’ti, n. also: dz̀’i short broom

tsǒ̤tu, n. cap, hat: tsgǒ̤ u b̤d solldier’s helmet; tsǒ̤’tu f̤̍tsà’
cap with sting-like projections (of origin) ;
tsǒ̤’tu mboà’ti flat cap; tsǒ̤u mṳ̍ńaṅkweè FEuropean
nightcap, knitted cap; tsǧ̤u ṅkàbnswi’ cap made of
raffia bast.

tso’tuṅ, n. fungus sp. (edible, cup-shaped)
tsǔ’’ṳ ndzi, n. rag, old torn-up cloth

tsu, n. word, language; u ni mbuli tsu měǎ, mbi’ko̤ e, u mà nd
mà tsu mbòṅka̤d bo vwohy do you talk so strongly, can
you not speak properly; i kǎǐ mbuyti tsu buṳ’à bo kwà’ ni
t̤̍n he has been bitterly hostile to anything I have said;
fǎṅ tsu call aloud, roar; bo kà mm ù ni tsu they
tempted him with words; i l’ tsu he brought up a case;
tsu dzǎṅmàn arrogant speech; tsu dzeyàn i mbuṳ̯kad
indecent wit, silly talk; tsu kntikà̤nti short talk;
tsu ko̤̍fi’ti unutterable words; tsu ko̤̍ru’ unintelligible

 

tsu, v.

tsuṅ, n.

tsuṅ, v.

tsuṅ, v.

- 31 -

words, not correctly understood; tsu mfo̤kad incdecent,

bad word; tfsoû̍ nníâna proverb, saying, adage, word hinting
at s.th., simile, parable; tsǒd nsànsan clear, intelligible word;
ts nto̤ṅto̤ṅ incorrect word or speech; tsǒ̤ ntswaàṅ̍nts wàṅ̍
speaking from a distance; es ṅko̍bko̤b unsuitable word

or speech; ts word of God; ṅgoṅ foreign
language; bo tcsu ni tsoûtum ṅgodṅ ited they speak three
languages; § ṡguli tsu, mo tsu

speak, sound, talk; bo ni ntfsu nts ntsù they are
speaking one against the other; ndikàṅ tsu a gun
has spoken, was fired; ṅk̤̍nd̤̍ṅ tsu mu̯̤̍ the drum has
spoken; ṡko̤̍ndo̤̍ṅ mfòn tsu mṳ̌ ṅgâ, bùn to, m̌̌’ màùn ti
mà nto bo̤, mfòn nuyṅ i ni sa’ (kè mfòn nuyṅ sa’ nd i)
the drum of the chief has spoken, people should come;
if someone does not come, the chief will punish him;
ṅk̤̍nd̤̍ṅ ndâ ikoòb tsu mu; bi ye, bà γo̤ ma ndà Nikoòb,
ndzu’ nɑ̌ ikòb the drum of the church has spoken,
let us go to the church and listen to the word of Godi
§ yγâ, sun

heap, pile

heap up, gather. collect: bo kà ṅg wàfṳd ntsub kpad
kpad they have gathered the corn to heaps.

heap up, accumulate, coat, cover
be or become ull, overflow; y, à let it be full.
terribly, abominably; à lǎm me tesàùṅ it stinks terribly.

bunch; ṅgwàfṳ̯d bunch of Indian corn: bo kà kwěd
ṅg wàfṳyd, ṅko̤̍ji ku̯tàṅ ṅ̤â, à dzum they have tied
bunches of Indian corn and hanged them on the ceiling
so that they can dry.

fly sp., gad-fly, big mosquito, red stinging fly

rise collectively against s. o. (in order to insult or hurt
him); rush in on, press in on, assault somebody; bo buyṅ
mà yǒ̤ tsuṅ yab, y ṅgo̤’ ndǐ bo they rose, in order
to assault them and inflict trouble on them; § dazu

hang up, hang (with head downwards) ;

ṅgùmba k’ ntum mùn mbò bo, i tum, ṅgàbti ṅgo, jn,

bo kwēěd a, mbo bo (bo ni mfuṅ ṅg̀ le ṅgâ, ntsuṅ”)
the Ngumba send a man to them once more, he goes
and distributes a kind of grass, which they fix head facing

 

 

= 3;gis: -

downwards; the grass is called ntsuṅ, This ntsunṅ is a
letter telling somebody to come; § tsuṅtsuṅ

tsu ṅku̍bṅko̤̍b, n. unsuitable words, speech or sentence

tsuṅni, v.

tsuṅ̯, v.

tsutiì, n.

tsuti, v.

tsutsu’, v.

tsu’, n.

tsu’, v.

tsu’, v.

be desponding; grieve; be sloping (of a hill);
ṅk̤̍ndoòṅ mǔ̯̤̍ the banana is hanging down;

à y ko, ù tsuṅni e?’ why do you hang’ your
heart down, what makes you grieve?

bend down, bow down, incline; i tsuṅṳ̯ yi mà y ko̤ e?
for what purpose does he bend down?

grumbling; tsuti tum madzo’ bo, mbi’ ṅkab le ko̤’ti a
the grumbling amongst them became louder, because

the money was not enough.

grumble, murmur, rebuke; i ni ntsuti a he rebukes me;

m̍ ni ntsuti Vincent, mbi’ nù, i kà y a I rebuked V.

for what he had done.

carry or hold a simple object in the hand; moṅgwi le
tsutsu’ bàm, ni ṅgo ma ntan; tsutsu’ ṅwà ni,
ni ṅgo̤ ma nda (ṅwà’ni that woman carries a bag; the
pupil carries a book and goes to school.

shrub, bush, trunk, stalk; smaller unit containing a
number of trees, houses, etc.; tfsu’ bùn smaller number

, of people; tsu’ faṅfaṅ shrub (hazelnut-like); tsu’ koòb

small forest, wood, grove; tfsu’ mu̯̍mbà’ piled cloud
(cumulus); ts’ mu’ small fire; à lǎb mǒ’ tsu’mu’ miyà
only a small fire is left; § sisamu’; tsu’ṅgòṅ small
village, hamlet; tsu’ tsu’ṅgǒ̤ tuft of grass (growing
together); tsu’ ṅkṳ̍ndòṅ, trunk of banana plant; tsu’ ty
grove.

dish of cooked and pounded colocasia, taro; tsu’ vù
tamtàm = tsu’ vù mbǎṅmbàṅ the colocasia pap became
lumpy (because of spoiled tubers or too slow pounding).

pound, knead; stamp; tsu’ tsa’ stamp clay for pottery;
tsu’ tsu’ = tsu’ kù’ pound colocasia or cocoyam;

mà tsu’ tsu’ ni ṅkǎṅtsu’ ma kùbti to pound cocoyam
with a short pestle in a carved wooden basin; tcsu’ ṅgo̤̍ṅ
ma ṅgo̤̍ṅ ṅkǒṅtsu’ ṅgo̤̍̇̇ pound Indian corn in
a mortar with a pestle.

gather, collect, tie together, join, heap up, prepare, make

tsù’li, v.

tsù’ti, v.

tsu’ti, v.

tsu’ti, v.

tsu’tsu’ v.

- gg6 -

fire, strike fire; tsu’ ṅkàṅ join a band; esu’ boùn
assemble people; tsu’ mu’ make fire; § tsu’ti, bom,
ṅkàṅ, sisamu’

ransom, buy off, set free; ts’ fu mùn buy off a slave
or prisoner; § ntsàù’ṅgo̤ṅ, ṅkwàn

call with a name, give a name; bo ts’ I̤ṅ ti ṅgí...
they named him; § ncesoàò’

overtake, attack suddenly; bo ts’ yab ni bad they
attacked them.

move clumsily; i tsù’i ndo̤ tsù’li he is running very
clumsily.

prepare, toast lightly (in order to prevent food-spoiling);
tsù’ti ntòńàùàm roast meat lightly.

prepare, assemble, pack together, join, flock;

kà tsu’ti bon-ľ̤’ mbùm bò God joined the parts
of the body together; tsu’ti kǎě pack the things”goods;
tsu’ti ndṅ join the raffia ribs; tsu’ti mbùm get ready;
i tsu’ti mṳ̌ yn, ni ṅǧ̤ he is ready to go; n’ dzo̤ mṳ̍ mb̌ṅ
ńad, bo bo tsu’ti mu̯̍ I have seen a herd of buffaloes,
already flocked in their order of travel; yo ṡwaà’n me’
tsu’ti nindùn tebi these books are all heaped up on the
table; bon bi tsu’ti ndǐ̌ i his children joined him;

tsu’ti ṅgùbń̇m pack skins of animals; tsu’ti bà’ti ndzi
join clothes; tsàd’ti ṅgwàfṳd pick up maize; § ntsu’tntsu’ti

shake, rattle; tsu’ti bo shake the (right) hand (some-
times holding a spear or stick to salute with); tsu’ti

ntsù cinse the mouth; tsu’ti ntsoṅ rinse the bottle.

keep or carry in the hand

tsǔ̌’tsu’, adj. in heaps, heaped up

tsu’̯, v.
tsṳ, n.
tsṳ̌b, v

join, crowd; bàkom kaà tsu’̯ ndž̤m mfòn the councillors
gather round the chief.

foundation, base, bulwark; ts;ṳ̯ndab feoundation of the
house; tsṳ̯ndâtsaṅ, foundation of the prison.

deal out, distribute (small quantities of liquids) ;
ndù’ ma ntu’ γâ’, mfa mu’, n’no pour a bit of
wine in this cup and give it to me that I may drink.

 

 

ts̀̍bti, v.

tsṳm, n.

tsuṳm, v.

tsṳ̯m, v.

ts̯mni, v.

tsuṳ̯mti, v.
tsu̯ndab, n.
tsuṳ̯nsi, n.

tsuṳ̀ṅ, n.

tsùṅ, adj.

tsyṳṅ, n.

tsṳ̌ṅ, v.

tsṳ̌ḟkuɑ̌’, n.

tsṳ̌ṅmi’, n.

tsṳ̌ṅndìbà’

ts̀ṅni, n.

s =

intensive form: deal out, distribute;
ts̤̍bti ndù’, mfa mbò bo, bo no pour out wine and
pass it to them that they may drink; § kob, sebti

pregnancy; i ni tsṳ̯m she is pregnant; but: i kà Iǎ’ dzṳm
(ts̯m) she became pregnant; § dz’ṳm

show off; i ni ntsṳ̯m be is showing off; i ni ṅkanikaàd
= i ni ntsy̯m ṅgòn, ni ntogd iṅgâ, i bo̤ ṅgoònṅgòn she is
walking about with pride, showing that she is a fully
developed girl.

sink down, drop, expire; à ts’ṳ̯m bo’ it made a dent.
sigh, long for, groan; i kà yu’ nù le, à tsà i, i bi’ni mà

ts̯mni be heard the matter, it passed him, he started

to sigh.

drop, make drop; ni nts̯mti rain is dropping.
foundation of house

foundation of the earth

big pot with narrow neck; bottle; ntsi boaterbottle;
tš̤ṅ bṳ̯nmfàòṅ milkbottle, as used for babies; § tṧ̤kṳ̌’

pitch-dark; à sa̤n mè it is pitch-dark; § ly’γsg

homeless”helpless person; i v̌̌ tsynṅ he became home-
less; §

be or become confused, ramble, stray about;
mi’ mi Io’ nts̤ṅ his eyes strayed about in a confused
manner.

pot for cooking colocasia; § esg̤ṅ, k’
epilepsy in the first stadium; § votu

n. tobeacco pipe; tš̤ṅndibà’ mf̤df̌d brass -pipe;
ba̤̍wi ni nno tš̤ṅndibà’ the women smoke pipes;
tš̤ṅndibà’ ba mṳ̀ bo̤ i mf̤df̤d my father’s pipe is
made of brass.

back, background, waist, meaning, reason, bottom;

i we’ ǩb ṅgùb ni i he ties a leather belt around
his waist; tso̍ṅni bòàm abdomen; bòm i ni i
his stomach is giving him pain; tsoṅni chin;

tsṳ̯̀ṅni, v.

n the reason of the matter or the meaning of ...

run about restlessly, be unstable, waver, treat unlaw-
fully; moâ Mateo ni ntsuṳṅni tso̤nni, k̍ l’n mà f’ fà’ bo̤
the child of Matthew is walking about restlessly and
does not know the work of the farm.

ts̍ṅnitàṅ, n. underside of the ceiling

tsṳ̌̇ṅkaṅ, n

tsṳ̌ṅntsì, n.

. pot for brewing beer

waterjug

tsṳ̌ṅtsṳ̍ṅ, adj. headlong down, hanging head down

tsṳ̌ṅtsùṅ, v.

tsuyṅuṳ̯, v.

tsù̯̍suṳṅ, n.

tsǔ’, v.

tsṳ̯’mug, v.

tsu̯’mu̯, v.

stray about

hunt, set on, urge, drive about ;
ma ntsgṅṳ mon le bo̤ co not urge the child.

shadow, reflex, image; bàńad ni ṅkoṅ mà nǒṅ mà
ts̤̍’sṳ̯ṅ buffaloes like to rest in the shade.

surety, pledge, bail

pledge (oneself or s.th.); nù kà tsà a, n’ ts’ ndzi à mb
ohnson, ṅko̤ ṅko̤̍ itàn; à bi I ṅgàb iba, n’ to, ṅkò’̯ ṅkṳ
itàn le, ṅko̤ ndzi à mandzà̤m I was in trouble and
pledged my dress to j. and got Soo Fr.; after two weeks,
I came and returned the money and got my dress back.

shake, rattle; tš̤’ ntsà’ = ndoṅ̍ ntsà’ = mbatsà’ shake a
rattle; § mbàtsà’

refer to, cite, quote, point at, interpret ;

bo ts ’mug l̤ṅ ti ṅgâ ... they interpret his name ...;

i suṅ nd, ṅgǒ̤§̌ nesṳ̯’mu̯ nà ù he has said this with respect
to your mother, referring to ...; bo džěb ntsi, ntsy̯’mu ni
l̯ṅ mùn they sing a hymn in order to praise a person
with it.

hand over, (thing or person) ;

bi ts’ṳ̯’muṳ sà’ le ni bo mfòn e? did you hand over the
affair into the hands of the chief?

ù tsuṳ’muy na ni sa’ you entangle me in an affair;

tsi marriage affair: make known to the family

of the wife after having married her without their previous
knowledge; e.g. mfa̤d à kà ku, mmà ti ṅgwi i mb mu:

n’tà’ m’ ṅkab, ṅgǒ̤, nti’ ba mùṅgwi le, tsi mbà i

 

 

–- gg -
my brother died and left his wife to me; I got some
money and went and saw the father of that wife and
settled the marriage affair.
tsu̯’mu̯ ndoṅ, v. partly cut raffia ribs, so that the ribs can dry
tsù’ti, v. tremble, shake, shiver, be or become disturbed;
I̤’ the place is shaken; ta’ mù ńin ma nt-s(ṳ,̀ ti yi
mbi’ ṅgo̤’ be bo̤ (to one nast become disturbed by
these difficulties; nsi ni ntso̤’ti earthquake; §

tsṳ̀’tì, n. point, dot

tswad , adv. suddenly; ked fi ’ni mè tswad teohe arrow was shot.
suddenly.

tswan, n. wvhip (with cane, flexible part of whip); lash

tswa’, adv. energetically; à vu màsi mè tswa’ it fell down with
a plop.

tswa’ṅgòṅ also: tswa’tiṅgòṅ small village

tswa’ṅkù’mù̯, n. sect, party in a religious body, denomination

tswa’tì, n. small part (of object, of village); § nes

tswa’ti, v. take small portion from a greater quantity, share,
contribute: bo ni ntswa’ti ṅkab ma ndà mà yèmti
y ǎṅ-ṅgo̤’, mbo̤ mà yèmti fǐ’ sǎ“ teonaey contribute
money to help the suffering and also to support the
work of the church.

tswa’tswa’, adj. scattered, dispersed; § (̇gàṅ-tswa’ti-kě, ntswa’tswà’

tswe, v. drip, drop, run, flow, leak

tsweli, v. bungle, work clumsily; mod mu tsweli ti your hands
are very clumsy (in working); i ni ntsweli tsweli, kṳ̀ lin

mà fà’ bo he is not clever with work; § (̇gàṅ-fswembo

tswi, v. frame a coor; ma tswi ntsuǐ̌ ndab fPrame the entrance
or door to the house; § netswi

