- 3 -

u

ù, p. 2. sg. thou, you;
1) as subject: o fuṅ i youcalled him; i γâ, d ma nṅǧ̤
ma ntan bo̤ he says, you may not go to the market:;
2) p. obj. after the following prepositions: mbò,
mug̯ndùn, mundzo̤’, nď; i fa ṅwà’ni mboò ù he gives
you a book.

ù, p. poss. ?. sg. cl. 1.3 thy, your; a sa’ ù it is your affair;
nda ù your house; bàba ù your fathers.

u, p. obj. 2. sg. you, thee; bo fuṅ u they call you

u, p. poss. ?. sg. cl. 1.3 thy, your; boù u your hand;
kàòṅ u your spear.

-u, suff. to derive, causative verbal stem; cum go out;
tu’mu̯ throw out; be saved, live; lùṅṳ save

Vvà, n. thought, consideration;

và dzṳ̯ a ifainda it difficult to decide; à bo̤ ma
Bamenda, ni ndzaṅ; mon à bo̤ ma Batibo̤, ni ndzaṅ sǎ,
mu̯ yě bo̤ mṳ̍ e, và dzyṳ a my wife is sick at Bamenda;
my child is sick at Batibo; my thoughts eat’ me, what
shall I do; § baci

va, n. ward, place where the warden stays to watch prisoners

vadkilǎ, n. proper female name; death-bed; (Mu̯̍bako: vala = vu death;
kilǎ = kun bed)

vàgli, v. be clumpsy, disorderly, unsuitable;
vàglivàgli, adv. clumpsy.

vaṅ : v. . - puzzle, confuse, irritate, alarm, vex, trouble ;
ma bo̤ co not make such a noise;

tu bàsoge varṅ kwà’ ndzamuy there was a great commotion
amongst the soldiers; ù ni mvaṅ a mè, mb ko e?

why do you trouble me?

 

 

n

vaṅ, n. palm-branch, mat made of palm-branches and used to
cover the roof; bùn ma Moguhamo ni ṅkobti tu ndab bo
ni vaṅṅka kè vaṅmbù’ the people of Moghamo roof
their houses with leaves from the raffia vinifera or with
those of the bigger raffia; § kuku’to̤n

vaṅni, v. hy do you trouble me so much? § tàby

vaṅṅka. n. leaf of the raffia vinifera, mat made of its leaves

vaṅṳ̯, v. be hostile, vex, trouble; ù ni mvaṅṳ na mè, mbi’ ko̤ e?
why do you trouble me so badly? § esaà’muy, tob, tobni,
boli, tb

vàvà , onom. (falling: ntsi vàvà waterfall.

và’li, v. confuse. bring in disorder, lay about:
bo tsi và’li va’li they are not on good terms.

γǎ̯d; v. untidy; à v̌d m(̤̍̌ it is not neat.
v̯li, v. irritate, entangle, puzzle, embarrass;
i vli tù a he irritates me (my head) ;

i vi nù he confuses the matter; § tab

v̀liv̀li. adj. dirty. rent. torn; nazi moṳ̍ṅg wi le bo v̤ iva li
the dress of that woman is torn. :

vèlivelì, adv. superficially; i f’ veèliveli he works superficially.

ven, v. collect, gather. pick up
venti, v. collect, gather. pick up
vì. n. swarm: là mè vi i the locusts are passing;:

à ni ntsua màè vi i d. it sounds, vi ii.

vi, n. birth (ta-ma):; vi mon le tg̤n ti, à kṳ̍ bo ndzà̯kaàd bo:
y’ǐ vi bo̤ vi nazo̤nbi the birth of that child was very
hard, not easy at all; her birth is easy; i v̌ vi she
died during delivery; § mvivi, mvinì, numti

gnγ; bring forth, bear, give birth, produce, beget

vili, adj. dusky, gloomy; ka vilnivili itis still gloomy.

vinn. grass for thatch-roofs: bo kud vin they tie the grass
in bunches for thatching the roof:; § ralàn

vindz̤̀mbi

vòma, n.

vòmsòa, n.

vo̤, n.
vo̤, v.
vo̤, n
vo̤bila, n.
vo̤li, v
vǒ̤’, v.

v
vu, n

easy childbirth; i vi ndz̤ ndzò̤mbi she brings forth
like a sheep.

festival (usually celebrated in october), dance at that
feast; proper name, given to boys born at that time

name of month (corresponding September” october)

ruin, fall, destruction; loss , sweepings, dust, rubbish;

a la’ ti’ vo mb ù it vill become a loss to you; § mvǒ̤o̤
disappear, die away, vanish, become lost;

Farao boà bùn bi kà vo̤ ma ntsi Pharao and his people
disappeared in the water; ṅ’ kà vo̤ ti 1 have lost
plenty; kà vo̤ ̇kab ndzamuy ni kaṅ le I (ost a lot

of money with that pan; mu’ ma M̤̍fut vo the fire
at Bafut is quenched = the chief of Bafut has died;

§ kama̤, mvo̤vo̤

affection (of the skin), the skin becomes grey and gets
bumps; § f vo̤ :

sheep country ; vo̤à sheep; bia country (Mù̯bàkò)

make, become weak, wet (with oil, etc.); change, spoil;

ndzi à voi ni; ntsi me’ my garment became completely wet;
i la’ bd mbùm bo, yi, a voli yum mommom a be vill
transform our body which is weak; § foli

throw up, belch; màùn le no ndù’ titi, mbi’ni mà vǒ̤’
that man drank too much wine and started to belch.

extinguish, consume, destroy, annihilate, perish, damage ;
ù to vo̤’ti yṳ̯’ e?’ have you come to destroy us?’?

death; vu fed i cdeath pressed him, (he died of apoplexy) ;
vu ni ntàòb a mè, a swěd caeath is troubling me terribly;
vu ko’ ndǐ̌ mùn le ceath has caught this man, he will be
sentenced to death (because of murder); vu mo’ u, nsam
death threatened you, but missed you; i kǎ nti’ mbu’ bo̤
vu he was at the point of death; fènti vu drive off
the evil spirits connected with death (by offerings), e.g.
mǒ’ mùn kà ku Io’ n; bìimo’ nďṅ ndib; la, mfad i fuṅ bàùn,
bo bomti, i naṅ ndù’, mfa mbo bo, bo no; i fa kěèdzṳ mbò
bo, bo dzy; i suṅ mb bo ṅgâ, mfa̤d à kà ku, yo bo γǐ
ndù̌’ vu, m’ bo̤ naṅ mu̯̍ yò le bo̤ mà faenti vu ;
somebody had died long ago, nevertheless, his brother
invited people to gather; he cooked and prepared wine;

’

he gave the people food and drink. e told them, my

 

 

vùγu̯uvuγ̤

vukòb, n.

; vulàò’ndab ,

brother died; this is his palmwine from the funeral which
I have prepared’. This is how evil influences are warded
off; mà γǒ̤ vu go and take part in the public mourning
for a deceased person; mà vu lament, express grief
by loud lamentation about the death of someone;

i ni ńńa vu be coces not call death for anything, death
cannot suppress him, though he feels pain; i ko̤̍ fuṅ vu ni
nù bo, i k̀ mṳ̯ mbo’ bo̤ be coes not call death anything,
he has no fear of it;

mà s’ vu. bring the mourning ceremonies to an end

by washing off the external signs of the mourning;

i taṅ vu sltkbae or he has a tough life, resists death for a
long time; bo ni ntsǎṅ vu ni kě bi they show the goods
and riches and the virtues of the deceased in public; bo
tsini vu they watch the mourning place, in order to stop
any disorder; bo mà ni nda’ yu’ti vu bo teohey will not
taste death; § ṡku’ mumbaṅ

adj. soft, loamy; mo mùn i vùγ̯vuyγǎ̤ lungs; 1’ ntsa’
vd’γ ṳvu’γ , ni mboṅ kǎdzṳ. loamy soil makes vegetables
grow well.

death coming from the forest = villain, wretch;
vukṳ̍tṳ̯’ndab sudden death without last will;

vu nsweèdka̤d terrible death; vu nswisw’ slow death
coming from above; vu slow death beginning at
the feet and ascending; epilepsy; violent,
unnatural death; § nadzi vu, vu, ntsu’kom-tu-vu,
ntsu’-tad- vu

become, meet, happen, die, fall, come down, burst out;
bo nti’ mvù i vǐ tohey happened to meet him;

bad kà vǐ war started; fa’ni vù a contention arose;
mbṳ̍ṅ vù it rained; ndzi v ma ṅgoòṅ le famine broke out
in the country; sa’ vù a qouarrel arose; n’tsi ma ndìà i,
ṅkù ma vù bàbti sat in his house, my feet became flat,
I had waited in his house too long:

i vù ba̤d hae died in the war; i v dza ae becamae sick;
m̀ṅgwi le v fod the woman became sterile (because of
fatness); i vù ku̯̍tsu be became ceaf; i v li he fell
asleep; i masi be fell down; i v mba he became
mad; tsu’ vɑǐ’ mbǎṅbàṅ, the fufu became lumpy ;

i v mf̤̌ be became blind; bo v ̇koòd tohey began to
fight; bo v̌ sa’ they lost the case; i v tsṳṅ he lost
his home; i v vi she died during childbirth; vu wo̤’ni
death comes suddenly.

n. teraitor to his own family; snuffler, spy; § nazoṅndab

vɑ̌tu, n.
vutùn, n.
vu’ni, v.
Vvù’̯, v
vu̯b, n.
vuṳm, n.
vu̯m, v.
vùṅni, n.
vùṅni, v.

- 31 -

epilepsy; § tsyṅmi’, vo̤ṅńṅ

violent, unnatural death; moto kà ta̯mni, bimo’ bùn ku
vut̤̍m the car crashed, some people died.

wrest (facts, words, sentences, law to suit himself) ,
turn off, aside, pervert, twist; bo vu’ni nù le they
wrest the affair (to suit it to themselves); § dzo’li nù

be or become uull, be cloudy;
vù’̯ itis dull weather, it’s cloudy, dim.

herb sp., its leaves are used as a vegetable (bitter taste)

chase, hunting, partridge driving;

bo tant ṅgâ, bo to γǒ̤ vm ma ṅg w̤ n; mǒ’ mvi sàṅ, bo pò̤,
ni teoey decided to go hunting in the bush; on
the following morning they went and were hunting;

bo sa’ teohey arranged for the battue; bo tǎn vṳ̯m
they burn the grass for the battue (in which the animals
had taken shelter and were driven out by the fire) ;

§

follow after, be eager for, take part in partridge-driving;
bo vṳ̯̌m ndo teohey run a race; bo yu’ ṅgâ, ṅgab ma m̌’
ṅkònṅkà’, bo bini mà ndo, ni ṅgo they heard that

an antilope was in the steppe and started a hunting race
and went off; i ndù’ he drinks palmwine excessively,
is drunk.

epilepsy; § vota, tso̤ṅmi’; ṅgàṅ-vo̤ṅnň

be mad, stroll about aimlessly , be crazy; .

m̌’ màùn ni ntsu tsu i, à ti mu̍ ni ndan bg, le bo (ga,

tsu n funi bo̤ tsu a certain person is saying words
which are not intelligent, his word is like the word of

a mad person.

vṳ̍ṅvṳṅ (ndoṅ), n. (Meta: titoṅ) stag-beetle (edible)

 

 

s

wà, n. caoutchouc-tree, growing easily, its sticks are used to
make a living’ fence; also used for the construction of
traditional buildings; § waà-tactòṅ

waa, interj. expressing malignant joy
wab, onom. bang; à san mè waǎb it bucst into pieces with a bang.

wǎd, γ wǎd ,, v. cut, slaughter, fell (tree) ;
wǎd kàn contract an alliance (an animal had to be
slaughtered for safety); i wad mbùm i hae sut himself;
bo wǎd mbù’ confirm, by making two notches in the
trunk of a green tree; bùn kà tfsu mǎ’ nù, ṅgwǎd mb’;
mbàù’ le bo li’mṳ ṅgâ, nù le bǒ̤ nda’ntum, bo ṅ’kiti 1i’mu le
people agreed about s.th. and made a mark (in a tree) ,
that mark was a sign that when the agreement was to
be undertaken, it was the sign which reminded them;
mbàù’ f̯ni mà tcso̤̍ti kùb a mark or notch resembles making
a bet: wǎd ndǒ̤̇ cut raffia ribs; mi’mi bi’ni mà wǎâd ḟgàṅ
bi his face is becoming wrinkled; bo wǎd ṅgwàd they
tattooed their skins or marked the property with special
marks; i wǎd sǎ i masi he digs the soil; § ṅgwàd, kà, mbù’

wǎdndzà̯mndz̯̀m, n. cactus sp.; ṅâan tu wǎdndzà̤mndzà̤m bo̤ fufu
the sap of the w.tree is white.

b

wadyṅa, n. spear for war (Mu̯bako: wa = bd war; dyṅa = spear)

wàli, v. be or become dull, watery; à wàli it is watery;
ù naṅ ṅkaṅ bo̤ wàli wàli you brewed the beer too thin.

wàmbṳ̀ṅ, n. light rain, transient shower, fleeting: rain

wamni, v. idle away, pass time away in idleness;

ù ni ṅgwamni mè ṅgâ, bà to dzṳ̯ ko e?’ you are idling
away; what shall we eat?

wani, n. also: γ wani member of, group; generation, row, rank, file;
bo kà làb a wani itàn they have lashed me five times;
ni yǐ wan; in his generation; wani iba (in) two groups;
i kù’ ntum mǎ’ ṅk wǎn , à ts wani ṅkù ited then he
sent a third of his slaves.

wani wani, adv. from generation to generation; series after series;
all the time, always

2:36:

wàṅ, γ wàṅ, n. row, line, wall; group; bàsogè group of
soldiers; wǎ̇ntfsa’ wall, made of bricks; wǎ̤ntsi
sequence of songs or hymns; wà̇ loṅ ranck, degree, order;
wàǎṅ nindo̤ṅ row (number) of heavens; ns’ (one)
round (of basket making); wǎ̇ nsuṳ’ bo̤ ndzǒ̤̍ bùn bṳ̤̌ ntsi’
ited kè ikwà, ntaṅ nɑ̌ fà’ yab a, bo f’ i mùn ndi, nda’
mfǐ’ i mǎ’ mùn mfommvi, nda’ mfǎ’ i moǎ’ màùn ni m̌’
mfommvi; yò le bo̤ wǎṅnsuṳ̯’ work in turns means, that
three or four people sit and discuss their work, they do
the work of one today; the work of another tomorrow;
and still another one’s work on the day after tomorrow;
this is called: sharing the work; ni ni wàṅ in rows,
in lines; § nsy’

waṅgisì, n. napkin, headcloth, kerchief

wǎṅkufà’, n. pl. wǎṅṅkufà’ fellow labourer

waṅni, v. also: γwarṅ’ni fight (with fists, etc.
bo waṅni ṅkòd teoaey start wrestling; mù ni ṅgwanṅni
wàṅni nitò̤n ṅgâ m’mè’ti yà fà’ I am struggling very
hard to finish my work; §

wǎṅntsa’, n. wall of clay or burnt bricks

wǎṅṅka’, n. also: ṅgwǎṅṅka’ fence, line of the fence to be made

wǎṅwàṅ, adv. in groups, in rows, in lines; bo masi wǎṅwàṅ ma
ntso̤ě̌nṅgǒ̤ they lay down groupwise on the green grass.

wǎṅwo, n. brickwall, stonewall

wǎṅwob̯̀d, n. fortifications

wà-tatòṅ, n. tree sp., often used for fences; § wà

wàti, v. intensive form of wǎ̌d: cut, make a lot of cuttings

wa’, n. also: wa’ṅkun beans (small kind, its leaves are used as
a vegetable, cooked or fresh); § ntoòdwa’, ṅkun

wa’, v. also: γwa’ throw off, away, leave one in the lurch;
bo kà wa’ màùn le kg̯mvi, bo bd i they threw that
person out and refused him; i wa’ mvà’ ma bo’ she
threw the rubbish into the pit; § tati, wa’li, wa’ni

wa’ken, n. pl. wa’ṅken one vbbo deserts a friend in difficulty; rat;
wa ’ṅkěn bo̤ ndž̤ mùn wa’ nsun i, boi kà ko’ a (to leave
one in the lurch, means to throw away” a friend with

 

 

wal’li, v.

wa’ni, v.

wa’ti, n.

wa’ti, v.

wa’ti ṅgùm,

n

whom one has grown up; wà’kèn bo̤ mǎ’ mbàb, mfṳni

ṅwà’ (ṅkǎṅkàṅ) ṅg̤̍ńàm wa’ken is a kind of rat whose
fur resembles that of a a leopard (esp. the dots and

stripes) .

not finish, leave work unfinished , disregard to work;
ù wa’li nù ti you are leaving the work given to you
unfinished; § wa’

neglect; où ni ṅgwa’ni fà’ ù wa’ni, mbi’koo e?’ why do you
neglect your work? § wa’

also: γwa’ti rack, made of raffia ribs, used esp. in the
kitchen for plates and pans, etc.; § muyloṅ

be minor to, remain behind; le wa’ti i mà
ṅgu’ bo̤, i ko̤’ti m̯ the boy remained small, did not
grow much, he is short; kěǎědzṳ le wa’ti mṳ̯̤̍, à bǎṅ mà
mǎ’ the foof is small, it is good to add some.

n. borizontal support in the roof; § nco tiṅgùm, to ti,
mu̯lo̤ṅ

tremble, shake; nsi bo̤ kà mà mbi wàti bub bo the
earth never quaked like this; § ṙg w̤ti w̤ti

art, handicraft; § mbù’wa, (̇gàṅ-we

also: γwěǎà catch, seize, take hold of, understand meaning
of comprehend; suit, fit; bo kà bi’ni wě fa’ni wu’ they
started a dispute there; bu i mà ṅg wě m̌’ sa’ bo we
have no quarrel with one another; i w tso§ṳ̤ṅni nù le kwà’
mbòṅka̤̯d be understood the reason very well;

bo kà w i ni ntsint̯d they made him a servant of the
chief; bo’ w ṅgodṅ bùn me’ fear overtook all the people;
mu̯̍ndz̤’ wě a (oneliness overwhelmed me; favnṅṅg wa̤n wěb
a = và dz a, n’ ti lin nù mg̯ yě a bo aelplessness
overwhelmed me, I did not know what to do; sweèd wě
yab. fright, horror took hold of them; nsi wě i, mfa ù
God has brought him to you; nsi = (ńikòb; nsi wě m(ṳ̤̍ y ǎn
le, mfa mṳ̀ cod caught the thief and handed him over
to me.

also: wě sseize
seize ; bo wèni bo ni bo they hold each other’s hand;

ma mbim r(̇gâ, bo wèni bo bo̤ dont’t allow them to take
each other’s hand (fight).

=

seize, make prisoners; bo waci they imprisoned
the thieves.

also: γwe’ tie, tie round, (clothes, girdle, belt, etc.);

bìmo’ bùn ni ṅgwe’ fù some people tie medicine (amulets)
around (their neck); bn we’ kb̤d òkòb put on God’s
armour; i kà we’ kǎbṅgùb hae had a leather girdle round
his waist; wi mfàòn ni ṅgwe’ mbuṳ̯m ni tù yab tekhe chief’s
wives put cowrie-strings on their head (sign of belonging
to the chief); bu̯ ù we’ ndzi ńin (Pr.) we have the same
trouble; ; we’ ntùm he put on the Ntum (big cloth tucked
into the girdle in front and back, passing inbetween the
legs, as is common with the chiefs of Banso and Mbundam).

wi, n. pl. of ṅgwi wives of; ̇gwi mfòn chief’s wife; wi mfàòn

wib, n.
wiíd, adv.
wiṅ, adv.
wo, n.
wo; n
wolela, n.
wàòm, n.
wom, v.

wàòmked, n.

wongṳ̀ṅ, n.

chief’s wives; wi ba mu nou father’s wives; wi ba
my wives.

also: γwib a piece of wood
quickly, suddenly; i là mè wid he passed very quickly.

also: yγwiṅ very (clear, clean); à an mè wiṅ it is
very clear.

also: γwo stone; wo fu pnrbhite stone, marble;
wotita shallow grinding stone used to grind pepper with;

lower millstone; § wowo

honorary name, term of endearment (used by women to
honour their husbands):; ndu ; kà fun ṅgwi i, i bim ṅgâ,

n t’

wo the husband called his wife; she replied, ’stone’
sacred heap of stones in the chief’s place
bow; woòmked bow and arrow; ṡǩ̯woòm bow-estring.

make a garden bed; wormm fà’ dig soil to make a bed
of; wom p(̇goòṅ-fà’ make beds when farming.

bow; § ked
also: γwòn sickness; leprosy; § ntso̤b

short cloth for women, consisting of a skirt, covering
only waist and thighs

nether, shallow millstone for grinding Indian corn

 

gg: -

woṅgwàdmu’, n. flint, stone to strike fire with
wosàṅ, n. precious stone, pearl

wosi, n. basalt.

wosòṅ, n. pl. wonsòṅ elephant’s tooth in the chief’s place, where
the chief puts his feet on; § woctu’

wo-tubuɑ-ndab, n. corner stone of the house

wotu’, n. stone in the chief’s place, to sit on; § wosoòoṅ

wowo, adj. also: γ wo wo stony

wǒ̤ěb, v. hang in, put in, embrace, hang over s.th.;
bo kà (ṅǧb ṅgǎṅmi Paulo teohey held Paul at his neck;
§ wobli, wobni, wobti; wobndab; ṅgobli

waobga some name

woòbli, v. hang together, hook on, take person’s arm;
ù wobli mbo ti you are trying to entangle a lot of
people into your affairs: ṅgàṅ-wobli mbo bo̤ màùn, yi, fà’
ni mbi tsà i. i nta’ ṅgâ, bùn yemti i a Ngaṅwobli is a
person who tries to win people to help him, when his
work becomes too much; bàùn, bi, bo koṅni a, ni mbi kani,
ṅgòbni mbò mab people who love one another, go arm
in arm when they are promenading; § wǒb

wobndab, n. facing board of the roof; § wǒòb

wòbni, v. hook in, go arm in arm, embrace; § wǒb

wòbti, n. cing, ring finger; i sǎ wobti ni’ bò i he put a ring on his
: finger; golden ring; wǒbtǐ stamp signet ring.

wolo’mbàṅ , n. also: γolo’mbàṅ kernel of the oilfruit (oilpalm) with
shell; stone with kernel, (the oil extracted from the kernel
is used as a cosmetic) .

wolo’tu, n. skull, brainpan

wom, nu. also: γ wom ten, pl. vṡgomm tenth; wom-ntsoòb-ńim eleven;
ṅgom ibâ twenty = b̌̇gam.

wom, womwom, n. teithe, tenth

m m (n p m N T

i

womndzi, n. tree sp. which bears small fruits that are used by boys
as ammunition for their siso’s; formerly the bark of that
tree was prepared and used for clothing: bo ndzob yγa’
womnadzi, ni mbu’, à bod, bo we’ ndzo̤̍ ndzi the bark
was loosened and beaten, until it was soft and then
put on as garment. (The stems are used as supports in
buildings and for making fences. The tree also serves as
a welcome shade).

womti, n. also: γwomti honour, homage, mark of honour

womti, v. also: γwomti honour, esteem; Bà ni ni ṅgomti mfòn yàb
ti the Bali honour their chief very much; mo f(̇gomtika̯d
ni mbi la maṅko̤ṅ ba ;, mboli yi masi a child honours
his father. when it passes nearby him and bows down.

nu. ten § wom

v. also: γwǒ̌ṅ hire, call, enlist, recruit, levy;
ù wǒṅ fà’, nď̤m so (Pr.) you hire people for farming
and hide the tools for the work; o t’ ṅ̍gâ, n’nuṅ ndzi,
yǎ ṅkoṅ ṅwà’ni ti bo̤, mu to nuṅ bo̤ mṳ e?’ you want me
to add the tones to the words, but I have no penscil.
ow can I co it?

wo’, v. also: γwo’ swim; Sema wo’ntsi Sema swims in the
water; §

wò’li, v. be friendly, hearty, merry, brisk, lively, jolly;
mon le wàò’li ti the child is very lively.

wò’ti, v. choke; màn le ni ṅgwod’ti that man is being choked.

p. interr. sg. who, whose, whom;
à kà suṅ wo̤ nsuṅ yò nù e?’ who said that? a wo̤ e?
who is that? a wù wo̤ e?’ urbo are you?
i fa ṅwà’ni le mb wo̤ e?’ whom did he give the letter?
ndzi le bo̤ i wo̤ e?’ vobose cloth is that?

wǒ̤d, v. be frightened, shake with fear; mǒ’ nswen kaà ton, ṅgàṅ-
ńa’-ńàm bini mà wad an elephant was blaring, the

hunter became excited.

wodka̤̯d, v. be impatient; Marta kě ṅgwo̤̍dka̤d mà fa kědzṳ mbò esu
Martha was impatient to serve jesus a meal.

wo, interj. oh

 

o; -

ẁni, v. also: ẁ̤dni surprise;
à kà bo ni ṅkǐ’, pastor wo̤̍ni ba Vohanne, mbi’ nù ntad;
mbi’ i mà ntsu mbàò i là’ kwǎm bo a, nsuṅ mbò i (̇gâ, nɑ̌
ntad bo̤ ndi ò yesterday the pastor surprised father
ohn with the eucharist; he did not inform him vell
enough in advance, but just said, it would be today.

wò̀ti, v. shake with surprise, be surprised
wo̤tola, n. also: γw̤t̤la lake; wo̤to̤la mu’ fire-lake, hell

wo̤,ni, n. half fullness of, incompleteness of; i tu’ ntsi wo̤’ni
he draws only half (a bucket) of water;
à vù wo̤ ni it became less, will soon be finished;
à kuṳ̯ mbo̤ w̤ ni i it is only part of it; § wo̤íṳ̤, boṳ
wǒ̤ni, v. also: γwǒ̤nmi become or be frightened, terrify ;
mu̯̍ ni nta’ mà yγǒ̤, ṅgwo̤’ni mùn le; màùn le bati ṅgâ, à
wo̤ ni wo̤ ṅgwo̤ ni a e? I want to go and frighten that
man. e asked, ho is it who frightens me?”

wǒ̤nhi, adv. suddenly; i wǒ̤;ni ntum hae suddenly came out of
the house.

ẁ’ti, v. make dough, toughen by cooking; nǎ mu ni ṅgwo̤ ti mpà
my mother is making a vegetable stew; où bǒ̤ ndam fjìgo̤̍ṅ,
à ti mà ntg̤n bo̤, bo suṅ̀ ṅgâ, ù wo̤§ti ṅgo̤̍ṅ le, ṅg wo̤’ti
if you stir corn and it does not stiffen, they say, ou
are making dough’.

w̌’ṳ, n. incompleteness, part of the whole, rest of;
n’kǎ nsuṅ mbàò ? (ṅgâ, ù nyṅ, à lun; ù ti’ nnyṅ bo wo̤ṳ̯ ni,
mbi’ ko e? I have told you to fill it; why have you only
half filled it? § bo’

wàù, γù, p. indep. . sg. thou, you; wo’, ù kà y yoò nù ist is you

y

who did this; mb’ wù on your account; à suṙ kwà’
wo’ bub you just said so.

wubti, n. also: γubti screen put up near the door to prevent a
draught; also to separate rooms with.

wui, interj. ah, eh, hey
wukad, n. pl. bàwuka̯d old person; wukad b̤wi old women.

wàùli, v. sit quietly; i woù’li yi be sits there absolutely quiet.

- 2 -
wàùli, v. collect oneself, gather up one’s strength;

bo ńa’ ṅgùli yàb, ntsi they gather (up) their strength
and keep

wùm, n. hard yellow layer of gravelly soil
wam town, 3 miles north of Bamenda

wàùmti, n. also: γùmti saquare umbrella’ for men, made of bush
material; § mbud

wùmwàùm, adv. (burn) strongly; à ni ṅkṳ̯ m woùmwoùm it burns
in full blaze.

v. also: hem, border (a bag or basket); Nchinda kà
ba’ mǒ’ bàm, (̇gwȯ ntsù i Nch. wove a bag and
bordered the rim; § poṅ

wu’, n. greatness, width, breadth, latitude; glory, height, large-
ness; i no̍ni wu’ mfad i he is jealous of the glory of
his brother.

wu’, v. become or make big, great; glorify; § ṅgukad, ṅgo̤̍, ṅguṅgu’

wu’, adv. also: γu’ there; i wu’ ma ndab e? is he there, in the
house? àù tsi wu’ e?’ are you there? (greeting);
i kǎ mà (ṅgǒ̤ ma wu’ le bo be did not go there.

wù’li, v. sprawl, struggle, kick, irritate;
mon le ni ṅgu’li wàù’li the child is sprawling;
mvà’ wà’li ma Ii’ ta uaust is irritating my eye.

wù’ti, n. also: yγù’ti sliding door; wo’’tintsǐ mo taàṅ ṅko̤’ small
sliding panel to cover the opening in the ceiling.

wu’̯, v. shut a sliding door; § wo ug

wu’u̯, v. make great, enlarge, glorify, boast;
i ni ṅgu’̯ yǐ nù be is boasting about his affairs;
bùn ṅkuṳ ṅgu’̯ yàb wu’ people were esteeming them
highly: bo wu’̯ nď̇ mùn they made the esteem of
a man greater-.

 

- ao; -

y

yà, p. coref. II, 1. sg. on ny part, myself; m’ bo̤li yà I turn myself;
n’ suṅ yà ṅgâ, à kù’ni bub I for my part say that it is
enough.

ya, n. target, made of a small forked stick through which the
spear is thrown; bu’ ni nam ya, màùn, y koòṅ tso ma ntsǐ
i a, mb i dzṳ̯ mǔ̯̤ ve are shooting at the target; he
whose spear flies through it, has won.

ya, p. interr. (followed by the interr. particle e) where
ù 1̌’ ya e?’ where do you come from? = u ya maà to;
ù γǒ̤ ya e?’ where are you going? = u ya mà y̤̌;
mfa̤d ù ya e?’ wvhere is your brother?

yǎ, v. form a line (boys, soldiers) arange in a row;
n t y = ndz:-: bo i yγǧ̤p ndza ndoo̤ they went off and lined
up for a race; bi ya ni wàṅ stand in a linei

yǎ , p. poss. (preceding the noun), i. sg. mine;
a yǎ ndab it is my house; ṅ’kà y nù le ni yǎ tu
I did this on my own; mbùm a mà mbo̤ yǎ boo̤ ny body
is not my own I do not feel well; § yǎṅgan

yàb , p. poss. 3. pl. cl. l their; nda yàb it is their house.

yàb,, p. coref. II, 3. pl. themselves, on their part;
bo 1̌b’ yàb bo̤ k̯mvi they, on their part, are coming

from the outside only.

yab , p. obj. 3. pl. them; a mà mbǒṅ yab bo̤ itt coes not please
them.

yab , p. poss. s: pia their; a lṅ yab it is their name.

yǎb, p. poss. (preceding the noun) their; absolute use: theirs
a yǎb ndab istis their house.

yǎbṅgan, p. poss. 3. pl. theirs

yadàla, n. long robe for men only, with embroidery around the neck
yǎdndù’, n. funnel for pouring palmwine into a bottle, etc.

ani proper name of a royal family at Bali who came from

Samba; m̌ ani person of this royal family;
bǎ-ani teohe people of this royal family. (They can not

- 11 -

be sentenced to death at Bali-àṅa. If one of them has
committed a criminal offence, a palmrib is placed in his
hand instead of a walking stick and he is led by some

of the big men’ to the boundary of the country and is
thus banished for ever).

yǎṅgan, p. poss. l. sg. mine; yn bd bo ndzǒ̤ yǎṅgan
your struggle is the very same as mine; § y

yayin , interj. (abusive), 2. pl. shame on you?
yayù , interj. (abusive), 2. sg. shame on thee (you)
ya’, n. game

yě, v. do, make, happen, come to pass, effect, perform, produce;
ù ni ndze ko̤ e?’ what are you doing? i n ndze bon ntsaṅti
he pleases the people; bo to sur nù, ù to yě a, mb ù
they will tell you what you are to do; mfo̤’ ni ndze a
= mfo’ ni ṅko a = mfào’ ni ṅgwe a 1 have caugnht a cold,
I have fever; dzavṅ le kà bi’ni mà yě i ndiko̤ e?’ when did
the sickness start troubling her? bo ni ndze ndàm ni tù
yin they spread slander about you.

yèbti, v. distribute, deal out; nǎ yàb yeèbcti bi their mother gives
out cola-nuts; § abe;

yed, v. wonder, be astonished, be surprised; bo yed titi, ntsaṅti
they wondered a great deal and were pleased; §

yedbagbag, n. sword with a pommael at the end of the hilt.
yèmti, v. also: yèmti help, lend a hand; § sigaṅ-yèmti

yeti, v. praise, extol the attributes of (God), commend the
merits of; j yeti mbùm i he praises himself.

yètula, n. (Mubako) kind of millet with long fruit-cobs and small
red grains; also the name of the beer, brewed from this
kind of millet; yeètula bo̤ mo’ yi, bo ni ndzuṳ̯ ndzo̤
ṅgo̤̍ṅ, nnaṅ ṅkaṅ s m̯̌ a Vetula is a kind of food
which is eaten like corn and from which beer is also
brewed.

yè’ni, v. also: ngyèni lift a load onto head or back of carrier;
to, ṅgyè’ni a ni kuṅ le come and help me to put this
box on my head.

yl , p. rel. (often ommitted, with clause final a) which;

 

 

- 1os -

b 1Iǎ’ nazo̤ ṅgṳ̀§ le, (yn), bo ta̤m niṅkù’ a we saw the
leopard, they had shot yesterday.

yì, p. coref. II, 3. sg. on his part, himself; i boli yi he bowed down.
i boli yn; hae bends himself; i yâ ṅga ) hae said, no,
for his part.

yi, p. indep. 3. sg. he; it is he;
à In yi bo’ boà fen, yi, a ni màndzi le a it is he
who knows the holes and the precipices which are on
that road. (Ve should trust him, because he knows of
the dangercs best).

yl, p. poss. 3. sg. (preceding the noun) his; a y’ mon it is his child;
i fa ndab le mbò i, à ti’ yǐ ṅkańin he gave him the house;
it became his for good.

yiìn, p. poss. ?. pl. cl. i your; a mfa̤d yin it is your brother.
yiìn, p. coref. II 2. pl. on your part, yourself; bo̤̍i yin turn yourself
yin, p. obj. 2. pl. you; bo kà furṅ yin they have called you.

yin, p. poss. 2. sg. pl. cl. 3 your; à l ni bo yin it passed
through your hand.

yln, p. poss. ?. pl. (preceding the noun) your, yours;
à yn ndab tt is your house; bi kà y kwa’ nù, ndzo̤ bi
kà bim yǎ ṅgo̤’ ni yon a you have done a (good) thing
by sharing my trouble as if it were yours.

yinṅgan, p. poss. 2. pl. yours

ylṅgan, p. poss. 3. sg. his;
i mà mfa m̌’ Ǐ̤’ fà’ ni mbò i bo be did not
give him some land as his own (property).

yi’ , ag. thus
yò , p. dem. prec. this

yoli, n. arrow; ṅ’kà ta̯m ndzuṅ̤ (m̌’ mbab) ni ked ke ni yoli
I shot the rat with an arrow; yoli: tù i bo̤ ni ta’ mo
ked (ńin Voli-arrow has one small arrow at the head,;
ṅgwà’sù’: tù i bo̤ n; bon ked ited Ngwasu-arrow has
three small arrows at the head;
màmban : tù i bo̤ ni bon ked iba Mamban-arrow has
two small arrows at the head.

- 1o6 -

aṅ proper name

yo, v. also: yon sse -, look, regard, undergo; mù ni ndzo̤ ṅgo̤’ ti
I am suffering from a lot of difficulties; § kěndzo̤vo̤(,
kiti, ndzo̤̍vo̤

yokà, interj. behold , take notice, attention

yon, v. variant of: yo see (used when an object follows);
bi ti k̤̀ ndzo̤n a m̌ ṅka bo̤ you will not see me again.

yo̤ni, v. be able to see, be easily visible; see one another;
i yoni mbòbmboòb ba cannot see clearly; à yo̤ni ndz̤ ...
it looks like; bà to yo̤ni we shall see one another again;
lṳ’ le ni ndzo̤ni ti the place is easily visible, the weather
is bright; i ni nadzo̤ni = i ni ndzě nàù ni to’ mi’ he deals
unfairly, he deals partially.

yù, p. coref. II, 2. sg. on thy part, on your part, thyself, yourself
ù kǒṅ yù bo̤ koo̤ e?’ do you prefer on your part?

y, p. poss. ?. sg. (preceding the noun) thy, your;
àǐ y sa’ it is thy (your) case; § yṅgan

yum, n. pl. kě soject, thing; yumadzṳ̯ food;
yumdzg̯’ti bon (teooda for children.

yumfà’, n. pl. kěfà’ tool; yumfà’ bo̤ so kè muyńn kè tso̤b kè ndzàm
kè ṅkǔ mà bom ndab a tcceoo lis a boe or knife or chisel
or ax or a rope for building (foundation).

yumkàti iiìkòb, n. offering

yumko’u̯ n. leaven, yeast; § ko’

yumku̯̍tu, n. headless object, senseless thing, arrow-shaft, tale
without a moral aim.

yum , n. pl. kě-mf. cast, found object;
tsyṅndibà’ mfo̤df̤d cast tobacco pipe.

yumndab, n. pl. kěndab feaurniture

yumntsibàṅ, n. pl. kěntsibàṅ living thing, being of blood’

yum ntṳ̀n, n. pl. kěntṳṳn ss-.th. valuable, helpful; s.th. of interest;
kědzṳ bo̤ yum ntṳ̍n feood is s.th. helpfaul;

ndzi sě bo̤ yum nto̤̍òn clothing is s.th. helpful;
ṅwà’n; s also a book; §

 

 

-

yum ntṳnka̯d, n. pl. kěntù̯nka̤d solid object, firmament; § ntṳ̯n

yum n. pl. kěńńaṅtikad terrible thing, appalling horror,
disgust; mba̤d mfàṅ kè mùn bo̤ yum ńńaṅtika̯d excrements
from cattle or man are abhorrent; ńàm bǒ̤ mvǒ̤, à ci’ yum
ṅńaṅtika̤d vnhen nmaeat rots, it becomes detestable.

yumtasṳ̯̀’, n. pl. kǎtas̯̍â’ toy, plaything
yumtsi’ti ṅkù, n. pl. kětsi’ti ṅkù feootstool

yumwǎd ṅgwàd , n. pl. kěwxǎd ṅgwàd tool to cut signs of ownership
with, seal

yṅgan, p. poss. 2. sg. thine, yours; a yu̇̌gan it is yours.

yu’, v. hear, listen, understand, feel, taste, take notice of;
bo yu’ ni nt̤̍ yab they understand with their heart;
i yu’ mvi be feels the world = he feels the coming of
the new day = he wakes up very early in the morning;
i kà yu’ ni ndàm hae heard it as a rumour;
i bi yu’ ndzo̤”̤̌ mb̌ṅ bùn be ni ndaka̯d a, mb;ti ṅgâ, a
ň̌ ko̤ e?’ when he heard the crowd passing, he ingquired
what the matter was.

yu’ni, v. obey, become known, resound; ma ndzu’ni yab bo ni
f̯nimi’ bo co not obey them as a mere eye-servant.

yu’ti, v. taste, feel, try (food, etc.); listen; yu’ti ṅgâ, tsi ľ̤m e?
taste it whether there is enough salt; yu’ti ṅgâ, bo fùṅ
bo̤ wo e’? listen, whom they are calling?

yu̯ , p. poss. 1. pl. excl. cl. i our; a mo yo’ it is our child.

y , p. coref. II, 1. pl. excl. for our part, on our part, ourselves ;
b̤̍ k̯ mfati yo̤’ fati we only blame ourselves;
b̤̌ to Iǎb yṳ’ bo̤ n; nɑ ntan we, on our part, shall go
on trading.

yu̯’, p. obj. 1. pl. excl. us; bo ni ndo’ y’ they are keeping clear
of us.

yu̯’, p. poss. 1. pl. excl. cl. 3 our; a ṅgodṅ yṳ’ it is our town or
country.

yṳ̌, p. poss. l. pl. excl. (preceding the noun) our; absol. ours ;
y’ ndab b̌ṅ mṳ̤̌ our house is good;
yò ndab mbàṅka̤d bo̤ y̤̌’ this fine house is ours;
kè nda yj’ b̌ṅ mṳ̌ or: our housse is fine.

yǔē̇gan. p.

ỳ̯ò, int.

zṳuṳ

-

poss. indep. l. pl. excl. autcs;
kě’ be me’ bo̤̍ y̤̌ ṅgan all these goods are ours.

expression of agreement; § mo

greeting for a subchief

 

